WORKS ISSUED BY

                         The Hakluyt Society.


                                 DIARY

                                  OF

                            RICHARD COCKS.

                  FIRST SERIES. NO. LXVI-MDCCCLXXXIII




                                DIARY

                                  OF

                            RICHARD COCKS

            CAPE-MERCHANT IN THE ENGLISH FACTORY IN JAPAN

                              1615-1622

                        _WITH CORRESPONDENCE_

                              EDITED BY

                        EDWARD MAUNDE THOMPSON

                                VOL. I

                       BURT FRANKLIN, PUBLISHER
                          NEW YORK, NEW YORK




                             Published by
                            BURT FRANKLIN
                        514 West 113th Street
                          New York 25, N. Y.

             ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED BY THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY

                       REPRINTED BY PERMISSION

                        PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                               COUNCIL

                                  OF

                         THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.

  COLONEL H. YULE, C.B., PRESIDENT.
  ADMIRAL C. R. DRINKWATER BETHUNE, C.B.     } VICE-PRESIDENTS.
  MAJOR-GENERAL SIR HENRY RAWLINSON, K.C.B.  }
  W. A. TYSSEN AMHERST, ESQ., M.P.
  REV. DR. G. P. BADGER, D.C.L.
  J. BARROW, ESQ., F.R.S.
  WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, ESQ., F.S.A.
  CAPTAIN LINDESAY BRINE, R.N.
  E. H. BUNBURY, ESQ.
  THE EARL OF DUCIE, F.R.S.
  CAPTAIN HANKEY, R.N.
  LIEUT.-GENERAL SIR J. HENRY LEFROY, C.B., K.C.M.G.
  R. H. MAJOR, ESQ., F.S.A.
  REAR-ADMIRAL MAYNE, C.B.
  E. DELMAR MORGAN, ESQ.
  ADMIRAL SIR ERASMUS OMMANNEY, C.B., F.R.S.
  LORD ARTHUR RUSSELL, M.P.
  THE LORD STANLEY, OF ALDERLEY.
  B. F. STEVENS, ESQ.
  EDWARD THOMAS, ESQ., F.R.S.
  LIEUT.-GEN. SIR HENRY THUILLIER, C.S.I., F.R.S.
  T. WISE, ESQ., M.D.

  CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, ESQ., C.B., F.R.S., HONORARY SECRETARY.




                               PREFACE.


The history of the English trading settlement in Japan in the first
quarter of the seventeenth century is the history of a failure; and the
causes of the failure are not far to seek. Choosing for their depôt
an insignificant island in the extreme west of the kingdom, without
even good anchorage to recommend it, and at a far distance from the
capital cities of Miako and Yedo, with the Dutch for their neighbours
and, as it proved, their rivals, the English may be said to have
courted disaster. It is true that Firando was a ready port for shipping
coming from Europe; its ruler was friendly; and it lay in a convenient
position from whence to open the much-desired trade with China. And
the policy of making common cause with the Protestant Hollanders
against the Spaniards and Portuguese, who had first secured a footing
in Japan and were powerful in the neighbouring town of Nagasaki, would
have been a sound one, had the latter remained supreme. But, when the
English landed, the Dutch had already obtained privileges and had
established their trade in the country; and what ought to have been
foreseen inevitably came to pass. The Dutch were not allies; they were
rivals, who undersold the English in the market and in the end starved
them out of the country. Possibly, if our countrymen had been allowed
to maintain the branch factories which they started in some of the
principal towns, they might have held their own against their rivals,
in spite of the limited trade which Japan afforded; but when their
privileges were curtailed and they were restricted to Firando, their
case became desperate.

Purchas, in his _Pilgrimes_,[1] has told us the story of the first
landing of the English and its causes. The present volumes give us the
internal history of the factory. The original diary of Richard Cocks,
the chief factor, once formed part of those papers of the East India
Company, whose luckless fate it was to be destroyed or cast out of
their home in Leadenhall-street to wander through the world. Happily
the diary escaped many perils, and now rests in the British Museum,
where, bound in two volumes, it bears the numbers, Additional MSS.
31,300, 31,301. Unfortunately it is not complete. It runs from 1st
June, 1615, to 14th January, 1619, and from 5th December, 1620, to
24th March, 1622; but it has lost nothing since it left the Company's
archives.[2] I have not thought it necessary to print the whole of it;
but only those entries which have absolutely no interest, _e.g._ bare
memoranda of sales and purchases, have been omitted. As a supplement,
to illustrate the diary and to fill in the periods which are wanting
therein, I have added in an Appendix a selection from the letters of
Cocks and others, chiefly from the archives of the India Office.



Our early connection with Japan forms perhaps one of the most
interesting episodes in our mercantile history, and has a share of
romance imparted to it by the story of the English sailor whose name is
so intimately associated with it. William Adams, "a Kentish man, born
in a town called Gillingham, two English miles from Rochester, one mile
from Chatham where the king's ships do lie",[3] a seafaring man who had
served in the English navy, joined, as senior pilot, one of the Dutch
trading fleets which sailed for the East in 1598. Weighing anchor in
June, Adams and his companions encountered misfortune and delay on the
coast of Africa, so that it was not till April of the next year that
they reached the Straits of Magellan, where they were forced to pass
the winter. Hence they made for Peru; and after sundry adventures,
in which the fleet was dispersed and the _Charity_, the ship wherein
Adams sailed, lost the greater part of her crew, the latter vessel
in company with a single consort struck across for Japan. But bad
fortune still waited on the unlucky voyagers. The consort foundered in
a storm; and Adams's ship with difficulty reached the shores of the
province of Bungo, in the island of Kiushiu, in Japan, where she let
fall her anchor on the 19th of April, 1600. Her crew was reduced to
four-and-twenty, all told; and of these only some half-dozen were able
to stand on their feet. Of the latter Adams was one, and was selected
to be sent up to the court of Iyéyasu, the famous soldier who then
ruled Japan.

The moment at which Adams set foot in this unknown land was a critical
one in the history of the country. The dual form of government, by
mikado and shogun, had been in existence some four hundred years. In
the twelfth century, at a time when Japan was torn by internal wars
and dissensions, the military chief Yoritomo had risen to power and,
overthrowing his enemies, had set up the military despotism which,
acting in the name of the powerless mikado, ruled the whole country. In
1192 Yoritomo received from the mikado the title of Sei-i Tai Shogun
(Barbarian-subjugating Great General); and henceforth that title was
transmitted to the _de facto_ rulers, and lasted down to the revolution
of 1868. The mikado, the rightful emperor of Japan, became a mere
cipher, living in the seclusion of his palace, neglected and often in
poverty.

This peculiar system has naturally perplexed foreigners; and thus it is
that the mikado, or dairi, as he is more usually called by the early
European writers, is represented as the spiritual head,[4] while the
shogun, or military ruler for the time being, is always styled the
emperor.

Two families, the Hojo and the Ashikaga, successively held the
shogunate down to the year 1573. The last shogun of the second house
was deposed by Nobunaga, the son of a soldier of fortune, whose name,
like those of his two generals and successors, Hidéyoshi and Iyéyasu,
is great in Japanese history. Nobunaga fell the victim of treachery;
but his place was promptly filled by Hidéyoshi, who at once crushed
the rising which had overthrown his master and assumed the reins of
government. The son of a peasant, he had entered Nobunaga's service as
a groom, but, attracting notice, he was promoted to military service
and quickly rose by his own prowess to high command. Often changing his
name, according to Japanese custom, he appears in history under many
designations. By the Portuguese Jesuits he is referred to as Faxiba
(_i.e._ Hashiba); but he is more generally known by his later name of
Taiko Sama; and by this name he is called in these volumes. Neither he
nor Nobunaga received the title of shogun. The highest rank to which he
attained was that of kuwambaku, or premier.[5]

Hidéyoshi died in 1598[6] leaving an infant son, Hidéyori (the Fidaia
Sama of Cocks's diary), whom he had married to the grand-daughter
of his old fellow-soldier Iyéyasu, in the hope of thus disarming a
dangerous rival, who was also appointed one of the guardians of the
boy. But these precautions went for nothing. Even in Nobunaga's days
Iyéyasu was a powerful leader, and he had only submitted to Taiko
Sama after some hesitation. It is true that he swore to protect the
interests of the young Hidéyori; but many circumstances combined to
stifle any scruples that he might have felt in supplanting his ward.
It was whispered that the child was no son of Taiko Sama, and, even if
he were, the nobles who had resented the rule of the low-born chief,
whom they were forced to obey, were not disposed to continue their
submission to his child. What has always happened in such conjunctures
was sure to happen now. The other guardians of the young prince,
suspicious of Iyéyasu, began to draw together their troops; Iyéyasu
summoned his men; and soon after, in October, 1600, the rival armies
confronted each other on the field of Sékigahara, near Lake Biwa, in
the centre of the kingdom. Iyéyasu gained a decisive victory; his
enemies were scattered with fearful slaughter; and the young Hidéyori
was at the mercy of the conqueror. To the credit of the latter, his
captive received no harm, but continued to lead a life of almost
perfect freedom in his strong castle of Ozaka.

It was, then, only a few months before this decisive battle that Adams
had his first interview with Iyéyasu, the emperor as he styles him, at
Ozaka. How he found favour in his eyes, was taken into his confidence,
"learned him some points of geometry and understanding of the arts of
mathematics", built him ships and, in fine, gained such influence that
"what I said he would not contrary," Adams himself has told us in that
letter which, a captive in a far-off land, he addressed so pathetically
to his "unknown friends and countrymen." But when, in his yearning to
see wife and children again, "according to conscience and nature", he
prayed for liberty to return to his country, Iyéyasu hardened his heart
and would not let him go. The most that was granted was leave for the
Dutch captain of the ship[7] and one of the crew to depart. This they
did; and it should be noted that it was by the help of the daimio of
Firando, who now first appears upon the scene, that they found a junk
wherein to sail. The captain was soon after killed fighting against the
Portuguese. His companion returned and settled at Nagasaki, being the
Melchor van Sanfort (or Sanvoort) whom we meet in the diary. Others of
the crew no doubt settled in the country. One of them is incidentally
mentioned by Cocks (i. 171).

Adams's letter above referred to was written in October, 1611. It
reached the English factory at Bantam probably early in 1612; but
the idea of opening trade with Japan had already been entertained in
England. Adams's story was known there by reports from the Dutch; and
letters announcing the intentions of the East India Company were sent
out to him by the ship _Globe_, which sailed in January, 1611. In April
following, the _Clove_, the _Thomas_, and the _Hector_ were despatched
under command of Captain John Saris, with letters from King James I.
to the Emperor of Japan. Arriving at Bantam in October, 1612, Saris
remained there till the beginning of the new year, and then, on the
14th of January, sailed for Japan in the ship _Clove_, with a crew of
some seventy men. On the 10th of June, off Nagasaki, he first sighted
the western coast of Kiushiu, and two days after came to an anchor in
the haven of Firando.

The first to greet the English commander were the old daimio or
tono, Foyne Sama, then in his seventy-second year, and his grandson,
a young man of two-and-twenty, who shared the government. Both are
styled kings; and the latter is Figen a (or Figeno) Sama, who appears
throughout Cocks's diary as the king of Firando. Foyne Sama seems to
have been a simple and unaffected old man, not averse to merry-making,
but firm, and, says Saris, "famed to be the worthiest soldier of all
Japan, for his valour and service in the Corean wars."[8] Old as he was
and good-humoured as he appeared, we see something of the sterner side
of his character in certain remarks of our diarist. Almost immediately
after their arrival the English sailors began quarrelling and drew
from him a reproof which, though gentle, was a sufficient hint; and
we are told, at a later date, when his dog "Balle" was accidentally
killed by the English cook, that "if this had happened in the time of
Foyne Sama, who esteemed this dog much, it might have cost us all our
lives" (i. 248). The readiness with which he welcomed and encouraged
foreign trade is creditable, and proves that he understood, at all
events in some degree, the benefits which his small principality might
derive from it. He died in 1614, about a year after the establishment
of the English factory. The young king had not the force of character
of his grandfather. Though generally keeping on fair terms with the
English, his temper was capricious, and he was probably too indolent
not to be ruled by his own ministers, some of whom appear to have been
all-powerful. The principal nobles and ministers at Firando were: Bongo
Sama or Nobesane, Foyne's brother, and consequently great-uncle to
Figen a Sama; Tonomon Sama, and Genta or Gentero Sama, Figen a Sama's
brothers, of whom the first acted as viceroy in the absence of the
king, and the second resided as hostage at the shogun's court and was
in favour there; Sangero Sama, a natural son of Foyne; Oyen Dono[9] and
Semi Dono, the royal secretaries; and Taccamon Dono, the chief justice,
"our enemy", as Cocks calls him (ii. 3).

The Dutch had already been settled in Firando for some years. In July,
1609, their ship the _Red Lion_ arrived in that port and, favoured
by Foyne Sama, they succeeded in obtaining from the shogun leave to
establish a factory and to send one or more ships annually from Europe.
It was not, however, till two years after this that another small ship,
the _Brach_, arrived, and two commissioners were sent up to pay the
usual visit to the court. One of these was Jacob Speck,[10] afterwards
head of the Dutch factory and the contemporary and rival of Cocks. At
the court at Suruga they were met by William Adams, whose influence
with the shogun was used to such good purpose that they received most
favourable terms for trading in the country, while two embassies of
the Portuguese and Spaniards, which were present about the same time,
failed to obtain the full privileges they sought.[11] The head of the
Dutch factory, when Saris landed, was Hendrik Brower; and at the very
first mention of his name by Cocks, the jealousy which was smouldering
in the hearts of the two nations shows itself: "Captain Brower went
along by the door but would not look at us, and we made as little
account of him."[12]

The first business for Saris to transact was the hire of a house, to
serve for a factory, from Captain Andassee, "Captain of the China
quarter", the Chinaman who appears all through the diary by the name of
Andrea Dittis; his next was to prepare to visit the court of Iyéyasu,
only waiting to be joined by William Adams, for whom he had sent and
who arrived on the 29th of July. They started on their journey on
the 7th of August, leaving Cocks to manage affairs at Firando, and
travelled by the same regular route over which Cocks was afterwards
so often to pass: down the inland sea to Ozaka, and thence by land to
Suruga[13] where Iyéyasu resided, and afterwards proceeding to Yedo
to visit Hidétada, son of the latter and actual shogun, to whom his
father, according to a not infrequent custom, had transferred the
title in 1605. It is needless to repeat here the interesting details
of this journey, which are to be found in Saris's own narrative in the
pages of Purchas. For our present purpose it is enough to state that
the travellers returned to Firando on the 6th of November with ample
privileges for trade.[14] One request was however refused, viz. the
right to bring into Japan and sell the goods of Chinese prizes which
might be captured as a punishment for rejection of the English trade.
This is only one of several instances that are recorded of Iyéyasu's
fairness to all foreigners alike and of his refusal to mix in their
quarrels. It was also understood that, on the arrival of a ship from
Europe, a present was to be carried to the shogun; and for trade with
neighbouring countries a goshon or licence was requisite for each junk
that sailed.

"Now touching a factory to be left there," says Saris, "I had on the
twenty-sixth [of November] assembled my merchandizing council, where,
upon these considerations, viz. the encouragement we had received in
the Moluccas by private intelligence; the Dutch factory already planted
here in Firando; the large privileges now obtained of the Emperor of
Japan; the certain advice of the English factories settled in Siam
and Patane; the commodities resting unsold upon our hands appointed
for these parts; and the hoped-for profit which further experience
may produce, it was resolved that a factory should be left there,
viz. eight English, three Japan jurebasses or interpreters, and two
servants, who were appointed against the coming of the next ships to
search and discover the coast of Corea, Tushmay, and other parts of
Japan and countries thereunto adjoining, to see what good might be
done in any of them."[15] The eight Englishmen who were thus appointed
members of the English factory, were: Richard Cocks, captain and cape-
(or head-) merchant, William Adams, Tempest Peacock, Richard Wickham,
William Eaton, Walter Carwarden, Edmund Sayers, and William Nealson.

Richard Cocks[16] was probably a native of Coventry; at all events
he was familiar with that city (i. 172), and had friends there (i.
229). His name appears in the charter of incorporation of the East
India Company, 31 Dec. 1600; and in the earlier list of "names of
such persons as have written with their own hands to venture in the
pretended voyage to the East Indies," 22 Sept. 1599, he is described as
a grocer and subscribes £200.[17] He himself tells us (ii. 317) that,
besides being a member of "this Right Honourable and Right Worshipful
Society or Company which trade to the East Indies," he belonged to the
Merchants Adventurers and was "made free of the old Hanse", and he was
also a member of the Clothworkers' Company. A certain Richard Cocks who
sailed with Frobisher in his third voyage to Meta Incognita, in 1578,
and who was distinguished as "the first to sail in among the ice", was
probably a relative.[18] From 1603 to 1608 he lived at Bayonne, no
doubt as a merchant. Many news-letters written by him from thence are
preserved in the Public Record Office, addressed to Sir Thomas Wilson,
secretary to Lord Treasurer Salisbury. From this we may infer that Sir
Thomas was Cocks's patron. The correspondence was continued when Cocks
was in Japan; and some of his letters which dwelt on the wonders of the
country were sent to King James to read, who declared them to contain
"the loudest lies that he had ever heard." Wilson pronounces the writer
to be, though not lettered, a man of honesty, years, and judgment.[19]
As Cocks becomes well known to us as we read his diary, we will leave
him for the present.

Of the other members of the factory, two soon disappeared from the
scene. Tempest Peacock and Walter Carwarden went on a trading venture
to Cochinchina, and, as we shall see, never returned. Richard Wickham
appears to have been in more independent circumstances than the rest.
Even before Saris's departure he began to give trouble, as his time
of agreement with the Company had nearly expired and he bargained for
higher wages. He resigned his place and left Japan early in 1618, and
died soon after at Jacatra in Java, worth, it was said, £5,000 or
£6,000. William Eaton and Edmund Sayers[20] were with the factory from
first to last. The former is called by Cocks "my countryman", probably
meaning that they were natives of the same place or district. William
Nealson was turbulent and quarrelsome, particularly when drink put him
into his "fustian fumes". He died in March, 1620, "being wasted away
with a consumption." After reading of their constant bickerings, one
smiles to find that he made Cocks his heir; and, piously adds Cocks,
"if God had called me in his mercy before Mr. Nealson, then had he had
as much of mine" (ii. 321).

When Adams accompanied Saris to court, he had at length got leave from
Iyéyasu to visit his native land. Why he did not choose to sail in the
_Clove_, as he at first intended, was, he himself tells us, because of
"some discourtesies offered me by the general." In fact, Saris seems
to have disagreed with him on several points, and did not treat him
generously. But, perhaps, a better reason for his stay was that which
Cocks gives: "that he was loth to return to his country a beggar";
for, although Iyéyasu had given him an estate of some extent, he was
ill provided with money. And yet another and nobler reason may have
influenced him. "In my simple judgment," he says in one of his letters,
"if the north-west passage be ever discovered, it will be discovered by
this way of Japan";[21] and Cocks adds, "Mr. Adams is of the opinion
that, if ever the north-east or north-west passages be found out, it
must be from these parts, and offereth his best services therein,
the Emperor promising his best furtherance with men or letters of
recommendation to all princes, and hath entrance already into an island
called Yedzo, which is thought to be rather some part of the continent
of Tartaria" (ii. 258). So Adams took service with the Company, after
some haggling over the amount of his wages, for two years;[22] and
constantly appears in the course of the diary in various employments.
Cocks was evidently a little afraid of him, and, while praising him
to the Company as "tractable and willing to do your Worships the best
service he may," he cautions Wickham to "have a due care to give
Capt. Adams content, which you may easily do if you use him with
kind speeches and fall not into terms with him upon any argument. I
am persuaded," he adds, "I could live with him seven years before
any extraordinary speeches should happen betwixt us." Our Cocks doth
protest too much. Adams's friendliness to his old comrades the Dutch
is ever a thorn in the side of the cape-merchant: "I cannot choose but
note it down that both I myself and all the rest of our nation do see
that he is much more friend to the Dutch than to the Englishmen, which
are his own countrymen, God forgive him." But, in spite of occasional
outbursts of this nature, they lived generally on friendly terms, and
there is no reason to doubt the sincerity of Cocks's sorrow when his
comrade died.

Two others joined the factory at a later date. John Osterwick, of Dutch
descent and a kinsman of Wickham, came out in 1615 and remained to
the end. Richard Hudson, whom Cocks in 1617 calls a boy, and who had
lost father and brother in the search for the north-west passage, was
employed as an unattached servant at the factory.

Saris sailed from Japan on the 5th of December, 1613. The merchandise
which stocked the factory consisted chiefly of broad cloth and woollen
and cotton piece goods; also of Bantam pepper, gunpowder, lead, tin,
etc. Its total value was about £5,650. The Company was sanguine enough,
on Saris's representation, to hope for such success in the Japan trade,
as to be able to export silver in sufficient quantity to maintain their
Indian trade. But Saris's estimate of the mercantile prospects was
based on false premises. When he arrived, the prices of imports were
extraordinarily high; but then the Dutch had the market nearly all to
themselves, and the demand for European goods was almost too limited
to give room for competition. Steel and lead alone among metals, and
silk among materials, sold readily. Saris indeed had tried to arrange
with the Dutch factor on a profitable price, at which both nations
should sell their cloth; but the latter immediately "shipped away
great store of cloth to divers islands, rating them at base prices
that he might procure the more speedy despatch of his own, and glut
the place before the coming of ours."[23] But even apart from Dutch
competition, cloth was not a favourite article of trade in Japan. Saris
soon found that the natives were backward in buying, especially when
they saw that the English themselves did not wear the material they
recommended, "for, said they, you commend your cloth unto us, but you
yourselves wear least thereof, the better sort of you wearing silken
garments, the meaner fustians."[24] Cocks, too, naively remarks that
the people of Japan are "so addicted to silks that they do not enter
into consideration of the benefit of wearing cloth"(ii. 259). On the
other hand, if cloth happened to rise in price, it at once commanded
a sale among the wealthy, Wickham, in one of his letters, noticing
the disposition of the Japanese, especially of the better sort, to
buy those commodities which are most rare and when they are dearest.
Spanish cloth, he says, never sold better than when it was high in
price; when it fell, no one would look at it; when it again reached a
high price, it recovered its reputation. Again, when warlike rumours
were afloat there was a demand for cloth, as it was used for cases for
arms; and so, we are told, the Japanese preferred good measure to fine
quality. Sober colours were generally preferred. Venice red and flame
colour would not sell at all in 1614. In 1620, blacks and reds are in
fashion (ii. 311). Indian cloths sold not "so much for necessity as
for the new and strange fashions and paintings thereof", the Japanese
"being a people desiring change" (ii. 273).

After Saris's departure, however, the English factory lost no time in
attempting to establish trade in the country. At the beginning of the
new year Wickham was sent as agent to Yedo; Eaton was stationed at
Ozaka; and Sayers had a commission to the northern parts of Kiushiu
and the neighbouring island of Tsushima, the first step to trade with
Corea. In Cocks's letters to Wickham we see the anxiety caused by the
competition of the Dutch. Wickham was to "sell away, although something
under cento per cento," and not to be outstripped by his rivals.

A junk was also fitted out with a cargo worth £750 to trade to
Cochinchina, Tempest Peacock going in her as merchant (18th March,
1614) with Walter Carwarden to assist him. This venture was
unfortunate. Peacock was killed in Cochinchina, treacherously as it
appeared, and Carwarden was cast away on the return voyage. Although
two attempts were subsequently made by Adams to renew intercourse,
neither succeeded. Trade with Siam was also opened, a junk being at
once bought and commissioned for the purpose. Adams showed skill and
energy in fitting her for her voyage, and took the command in her first
trip, which however failed, owing principally to the mutinous conduct
of the crew. This venture was estimated at £1,400.

But the country with which the English most coveted commercial
relations was China; and through all the diary and correspondence of
Cocks negotiations are always in progress. The two Chinese traders,
Andrea Dittis, the landlord of the English house mentioned above,
and his brother Whaw or Whow, who was stationed at Nagasaki, were
the agents through whom Cocks hoped to obtain a footing in China,
where also a third brother was supposed to be negotiating with the
authorities to obtain the desired privileges; and not inconsiderable
sums were advanced to smooth the way. But China was then in a state of
war and confusion, and although in the end, after years of waiting,
Cocks was told that permission for trade was granted, no charter or
other documents arrived, and, in any case, it was then, at the moment
when the English were preparing to withdraw from Japan, too late to do
anything.

The English factory, then, had been established about two years in
June, 1615, the date at which Cocks's diary begins. The house which
had been hired of the China captain had been purchased and improved at
a cost of nearly £600. Foyne Sama had been dead some twelve months,
and Figen a Sama reigned in his stead. Captain Brower had disappeared
from the Dutch factory to make room for Jacob Speck. And we are at once
carried into the midst of native affairs. On the 2nd of June reports
reached Firando of the total defeat of the young prince Hidéyori
(Fidaia Sama) by Iyéyasu. As we have already seen, Hidéyori had been
left in comparative freedom after the battle of Sékigahara. He had now
grown to man's estate, and had the sympathy of a large part of the
country; and Cocks especially notices that the people of the southern
parts "affect the young man more than the old." Round him gathered
all who had reason to fear or dislike his rival; and, when the final
rupture took place, he had a following of 120,000 men. There can be
little doubt that the young prince perished in the burning castle of
Ozaka after the total defeat of his troops; but the fact that his body
could not be found was enough to give rise to the rumour that he had
escaped. His followers were hunted down and destroyed; but that he
still lived was widely believed, and that belief lasted for years and
is frequently noticed in these pages. Apollinario Franco, a Franciscan,
who was present at the terrible scene at Ozaka, escaped to Firando and
is mentioned early in the diary. Notwithstanding his protestant dislike
of priests and friars, Cocks could not refuse Christian charity to
one in such sore distress. We meet with him once or twice again. He
died at the stake in Omura in 1622. After the destruction of Ozaka the
shoguns adopted the policy of detaining for stated periods, at court,
the daimios of the several provinces or some members of their families.
This arrangement is often noticed by Cocks.

At the end of August arrived the ship _Oziander_ (or _Hozeander_) from
England, and Captain Ralph Coppindall was sent up to court with the
customary present. In a letter written after his return to Firando
he records the unprofitable nature of the trade of Japan: "either we
must procure a peaceable trade in China, or else, as the Hollanders
do, to trade with them perforce. And if we set foot in the Moluccas,
this place will be a fit storehouse from whence we may always have
men, munition, and victuals good store, and at reasonable rates" (ii.
271). These, indeed, were also the sentiments of the factors, and were
repeated more than once.

A quarrel with the Portuguese and Spaniards at Nagasaki, who had seized
and imprisoned two of their own countrymen for serving the English, is
among the events of this year. And, however much they might disagree
among themselves, English and Dutch were at one when attacking or
attacked by the other two rival nations; so that the capture of a
Portuguese junk by the Dutch and her condemnation through Adams's
influence at court as good prize gave unmixed satisfaction at Firando.
In connection with this capture, an interesting conversation between
Iyéyasu and Adams is recorded (ii. 276).

Early in 1616 a report began to circulate that Iyéyasu was dead. Cocks,
with the caution with which he had learned to regard all Japanese
news, rather viewed it as "a fable given out of purpose to see how
people would take the matter"; and he, no doubt, only expresses the
general feeling when he adds "once the old man is subtil". In June
the king of Firando is reported to have visited him, "but was only
permitted to enter into his chamber, where they say he lay sick in a
little cabin covered with paper"; and soon after it was known that he
had really expired,[25] not however before he had had the satisfaction
of having his physician cut in pieces. Cocks, however, was hard of
belief, and was convinced that "he will soon rise again, if any wars
be moved against his son within these three years." This son was the
shogun Hidétada, a man very different from his father in his manner of
regarding foreigners.

It was now necessary for the English to send up a deputation to court
for a confirmation of privileges under the new reign; and the ships
_Thomas_ and _Advice_ arriving from England just at the time, Cocks
got ready his presents and started at the end of July, in company with
Adams who had just returned from Siam. The account of the journey to
Yedo and of the audience with the shogun is very interesting. But they
did not obtain what they sought. The privileges were curtailed and
the English were restricted to the single port of Firando. In vain
did Cocks petition to have this decision reversed; and, although the
shogun's secretaries, Codskin Dono and Oyen Dono, did not seem to be
unfavourable, they declared that it was impossible to alter matters.
Inga Dono, also, the chief justice, could only tell Cocks "that at
present all matters were in other manner in Japan than in time of the
old Emperor"; and common report declared that "no man dare speak to
the Emperor of any matter they think is to his discontent, he is so
furious, and no means but death and destruction" (i. 186, 187). In the
end the English had to withdraw all their factors from Yedo, Miako,
Sackay, and Ozaka.[26]

But it was not only in this particular that things were changed.
Hidétada had determined to suppress Christianity. Since the first
arrival of the Portuguese Jesuits, followed by the rapid conversion
of whole districts in the western and southern parts of Japan, there
had been no systematic attempt to stifle the new religion. The story
told of Nobunaga, that, when he was urged to expel the Roman Catholic
missionaries, he remarked that, as there were already thirty-five
religious sects in Japan, a thirty-sixth could not make much
difference,[27] reflects the ease with which Christianity made its
way in the country; and the same ruler's policy of tolerating the new
tenets, while persecuting the Buddhist faith, gave them time to take
root and flourish. A sudden edict of Taiko Sama, expelling the Jesuits
from the kingdom, was not enforced to the utmost; and Iyéyasu generally
left them in peace, although towards the end of his reign fresh edicts
of banishment were issued and the sentence to a considerable extent
carried into effect. But many priests still lurked in the country;
and Cocks notices that the hostility shown to some of his men by the
natives of Omura was "by means of the padres, or priests, who stirred
them up against us to make us odious to the Japons, for they are all,
or the most part, papistical Christians in Umbra, and attribute a great
or chief occasion of banishment of them out of Japon by means of the
English, many papists and Jesuits lying secretly lurking in most parts
of Japon till this hour" (i. 139).[28] While Cocks was waiting in
Yedo for the copy of the privileges he tells us that the Council sent
"above twenty times" to question him about the religion of the English,
and were hardly persuaded that Protestants were distinct from Roman
Catholics. Even Adams, at whose house some Spaniards were staying, was
suspected of harbouring priests and received warning. These things
indicated, as the secretary Oyen Dono admitted, that the new ruler
meant indeed to "utterly extinguish" the Jesuits and friars out of
Japan; and there was good reason to believe that Christians of all
sects would soon go the same way. The immediate result of this severity
is seen soon after in the announcement, on the 22nd of May of the next
year, of the execution of a Franciscan and a Jesuit;[29] and other
persecutions followed afterwards.

Before Cocks returned to Firando, he visited William Adams's estate at
Phebe (Hémi)[30] which had been bestowed on him by Iyéyasu. "There is",
he says, describing it, "above one hundred farms or households upon
it, besides others under them, all which are his vassals, and he hath
power of life and death over them, they being his slaves, and he has
absolute authority over them as any tono or king in Japon hath over his
vassals." (i. 181.)

On their way back to Firando, they passed the site of Yoritomo's city
of Kamakura, "but now at present it is no city, but scattered houses
seated here and there in pleasant valleys betwixt divers mountains,
wherein are divers pagods very sumptuous, and a nunnery of shaven
women. I did never see such pleasant walks among pine and spruce trees
as there are about these pagods." This is the one place in all Japan
whose natural beauty seems to have impressed even the matter-of-fact
Cocks, who could dismiss the Hakoné Pass with its fine lake and scenery
in the one sentence, "Haconey on the top of the mountain, where the
great pond with the devil is, as they report."

The altered state of feelings at Yedo began soon to be reflected
at Firando. At the beginning of the new year the king showed a
disposition to meddle in the affairs of the English trade and betrayed
ill-humour in several small matters; and soon there were rumours that
both English and Dutch would have to shift to other quarters. These
disagreements drew a formal remonstrance from Cocks, who, "entering
into consideration of the small respect this king of Firando hath of us
in comparison of that which he had at our first entrance into Japon",
expressed his discontent in a "large letter"; which, however, was
received "in good part", and a friendly message returned. But, after
this, things never went quite so smoothly as before.

Other troubles also began to close in on the English. Their relations
with the Dutch were gradually becoming more and more estranged, until
their differences culminated in open rupture. In 1617 rumours reached
Firando of Dutch outrages on the English in Puloway, which tended
to increase the coolness so rapidly growing between the members of
the English and Dutch factories, who, as the Japanese observed, were
friends, "but from tooth outwards." The frequent piracies of the Dutch
upon the Chinese are reflected on by Cocks, who also accuses them of
gross cruelty to their prisoners. An aggravation of these crimes was
the fact that they were committed, if not under the English flag, at
least under the English name, the Dutch giving out that they were
English. Their success in this form of deception is illustrated by an
entry in the diary: "These Chinas in the junk [just captured] will not
be persuaded but that they are Englishmen which took them."[31] It was,
then, with only an outward show of friendship that the two nations
carried on their trade in Firando.

In August of this year the _Advice_ arrived from Bantam, and about the
same time Adams returned from a voyage to Cochinchina. Another journey
to court immediately followed; and this time no farther than Fushimi,
near Miako, whither the shogun had come to visit the mikado. A renewed
attempt, however, on the part of Cocks, to obtain an extension of the
privileges, the principal object of the journey, failed altogether. At
first, indeed, the right to trade in Nagasaki was added; but, in an
evil hour, one of the councillors took exception, and this concession
was cancelled. An answer was refused to a letter of James I., which was
now presented, on the ground that it was addressed to the dead shogun
Iyéyasu and that it was held "ominous amongst the Japans to answer to
dead men's letters." In the end, poor Cocks was, as he said, put to
"Hodgson's choice", and had to take what privileges he could, or none
at all. "So we got out our goshons, but the privileges as they were the
last year. Worry! worry! worry!" In fact, the Japanese themselves saw
the advantages to be derived from trade, and the shogun very naturally
"would have his own vassals to get the benefit to bring up merchandise
rather than strangers." The result was that a company of native
merchants appeared in the market and formed, if we may judge by Cocks's
account of them, what would now be called a ring.

It was on the occasion of this visit to court that Cocks and his
fellow-travellers came in contact with a Corean embassy, to which
he refers several times. The object of their mission, we are told,
was to pay a visit of ceremony to the sepulchre of Iyéyasu, and to
congratulate the new shogun upon his peaceful succession.

Nothing eventful occurred at the factory in the early part of 1618.
During a visit to Nagasaki in February and March, Cocks makes several
interesting references to the Christians whom he met among the natives;
and on his arrival at this half-Christianised town, the Chinese junks,
which were dressed with flags in his honour, flew the cross of St.
George among the rest. Before Foyne's death at Firando, the English
had been compelled to haul down their flag on account of the Christian
symbol that it bore. Meanwhile, however, on the north of Kiushiu bloody
persecutions were being carried on; and a little later is recorded the
news of the crucifixion of some thirty-seven men and women in Kokura.
Disquieting rumours were also afloat of a confederacy of the southern
daimios against the shogun.

Soon, however, occurred an event which concerned the English more
nearly than the political state of Japan. On the 8th of August, to
their intense indignation, a Dutch ship arrived at Firando bringing
in, as prize, the English ship _Attendance_, which had been captured
in the Moluccas. To do him justice, the Dutch factor Speck seems to
have regretted the action and offered to restore her, but not, as Cocks
remarks, before there had been time to empty her. An immediate journey
to court naturally followed, in order to put in a written protest
against this proceeding of the Dutch. But Cocks was told "that for
facts committed in other places the emperor would not meddle with it",
so that, but for the easing of his conscience afforded by the delivery
of his protest, and the pleasure of some sight-seeing, he might as well
have remained at Firando.

For nearly the whole of the year 1619 and 1620 the diary is wanting;
and during the early part of this period the Dutch were masters of
the sea, and the English in Japan were completely isolated. But, in
order to maintain their interests in the East, the English Company had
already, in 1617, despatched a fleet of five ships under command of
Captain Martin Pring. He reached Bantam in the middle of 1618, and,
sailing thence to Jacatra, had news of the Dutch attack on the English
in the Moluccas. He was soon after joined at Bantam by a reinforcement
of six large ships under Sir Thomas Dale, who assumed the command of
the combined fleet. After some skirmishing, the English retired to
India to refit; and there Dale died. Pring then again sailed eastward;
but, finding himself outnumbered by the Dutch, he was on the point,
early in 1620, of dividing his forces and himself sailing for Japan,
when he received news of the union of the English and Dutch Companies.
Thus relieved from fear of attack, he proceeded on his voyage and
reached Firando in safety.

How the English fared in Firando during these two years we learn from
Cocks's letters to the Company.[32] In the determined attack which
the Dutch made on the English factory there can be little doubt that,
had not the Japanese protected them, our countrymen would have fallen
victims to the Hollanders, who, "by sound of trumpet aboard all their
ships in the harbour of Firando, proclaimed open wars against our
English nation, both by sea and land, with fire and sword, to take
our ships and goods and destroy our persons to the uttermost of their
power, as to their mortal enemies." But in the midst of these troubles
there was a gleam of light in trade prospects, for the shogun was at
last induced, early in 1620, to allow Nagasaki to be included in the
English privileges. The advantages of that port, with its fine harbour,
over the poor "fisher town" of Firando, with its bad anchorage, are
duly set forth by Cocks; and we learn, at the same time, the reasons
why the larger town was not selected at first, "which heretofore
was not thought fit, because then a papist Portingale bishop lived
in the town, and there was ten or twelve parish churches, besides
monasteries." But now all was changed; churches and monasteries had
been levelled with the earth, and even graveyards uprooted and "all
the dead men's bones taken out of the ground and cast forth." The news
of the union of the two companies will account for the English still
remaining in their old quarters in Firando, to keep near the Dutch,
instead of migrating to Nagasaki.

Death had also in this interval brought misfortunes to the English
factory. The first loss was that of Whaw, the Chinaman, upon whom
Cocks so much relied to obtain privileges for the China trade. Then
Nealson died in March, 1620. And, last of all, "our good friend Captain
William Adams, who was so long before us in Japon, departed out of
this world the 16th of May last." If for no other reason, we must on
Adams's account deplore the loss of Cocks's diary for this period,
which would undoubtedly have contained some details of his last illness
and death. It is also to be regretted that we do not find more personal
details about Adams in the portions of the diary which have survived;
but he was so often absent on trading voyages and other business that
Cocks must be excused if he tells us no more than he does. As already
noticed, the cape-merchant held him in some awe, and, if we may believe
the diary, Adams was inclined to be somewhat hasty in temper. On the
other hand, he did the Company good and faithful service, and, to
judge by small things, the reader will not fail to notice the patience
with which he waited, time after time, on the dilatory pleasure of
court officials, in the interest of the English. His influence with
the shoguns is more than once referred to. "The Emperor [Iyéyasu],"
writes Cocks in 1616, "esteemeth him much, and he may go and speak with
him at all times, when kings and princes are kept out"; and again, in
1620: "I cannot but be sorrowful for the loss of such a man as Captain
William Adams was, he having been in such favour with two Emperors
of Japon as never was any Christian in these parts of the world, and
might freely have entered and had speech with the Emperors, when many
Japon kings stood without and could not be permitted." Adams had a
wife and daughter living in England. He also had a son and daughter
in Japan.[33] To all of these he left his property in equal shares.
References are several times made to the disposal of his goods and
to the transmission of money to England, as well as to difficulties
arising from the disposition of certain goshons or trading licences
belonging to his children in Japan.[34]

The result in Japan of the union of the English and Dutch Companies
was, as we have seen, that the English factory remained at Firando
instead of removing to the far more commodious town of Nagasaki.
A combined fleet of English and Dutch ships, sailing under the
modest name of the Fleet of Defence, was equipped for the purpose of
endamaging the common enemy and of diverting the trade of China from
the Philippine Islands to the Dutch and English settlements; in other
words, to blockade the Spanish and Portuguese ports and seize as many
of the Chinese trading junks as possible. In the two expeditions to
the Philippines undertaken by the fleet before the English and Dutch
again separated, they captured many prizes; and the Dutch are said to
have treated their Chinese prisoners with great cruelty, while their
new allies interfered to protect these unfortunate people. All the
time, however, that the English were thus engaged at sea, peaceful
negotiations were still being carried on by Cocks for establishing
trade with China, though it is not surprising that "our joining with
the Hollanders to take China junks is ill thought of."

In 1621 the English at Firando, apparently with the idea that trade
was now going to flourish, built a new warehouse and wharves, and
undertook other works on a large scale. But it was impossible that
their relations with the Dutch could be cordial; and dissensions soon
broke out. There was ill blood between the sailors of the two nations.
In the Philippines they could scarcely be restrained from fighting; and
when, at the end of June, the fleet returned to Firando and the crews
got ashore, they at once came to blows, and a Dutchman was killed. Then
followed the trial and execution of the English sailor who had killed
him; and the temper in which his shipmates regarded his condemnation
may be judged from the fact that "Captain Robert Adams was forced
to put the rope about his neck with his own hands." And it was not
only with the English that the Dutch sailors quarrelled. They were
drunken and riotous and "brabbled" in the streets, till at last the
long-suffering Japanese lost patience and seizing two of them summarily
cut off their heads. The English, too, demanded a victim. A Dutchman,
who had stabbed an Englishman, was condemned and executed by his own
countrymen in a novel fashion, "they having first made the man so drunk
that he could scarce stand on his legs, and so cut off his head within
their own house." As to the crews of the English shipping, they were
perhaps only a degree less turbulent; to maintain discipline and set an
example, four runaways were condemned and hanged.

In 1620 the English ship, _Elizabeth_, cruising off the Island of
Formosa, captured a Japanese vessel on her way from the Philippines to
Japan. On board were found two priests, who, in the end, proved to be
Pedro de Zuñiga, an Augustinian, and Luis Flores, a Dominican. They
long denied their names; and we find many references in the diary to
their examination at Firando. (It was an object to the English and
Dutch to convict them, as, in such case, the ship became good prize.)
In the end, these two unfortunate men, together with the Japanese
captain of the vessel, were, in 1622, put to death by the horrible
torture of slow fire, and the crew were beheaded;[35] so that we
cannot much regret that the captors were baulked of their prize. With
grim humour the shogun appropriated the cargo for himself, "leaving
the rotten hull for us and the Hollanders." So, much against their
will, the factors had to deliver over the prize goods, after a little
hesitation, which, however, they saw it was useless to persist in, when
Cocks was told that "they would take it whether we would or no, and
that, if we had not absolutely proved the Portingalls to be padres, the
Emperor meant to have put Captain Leonard Camps and me to death and to
have seized on all we had in the country; and, if any resistance had
been made, to have burned all our shipping and put us all to the sword"
(ii. 335).

At the end of 1621 Cocks set out on the last visit to the court at Yedo
recorded in his diary, the English and their Dutch allies now going in
one company. Speck was no longer at the head of the Dutch factory. He
had left Japan in the previous October; his successor being Leonard
Camps, who was now Cocks's travelling companion. After delivering the
customary presents, and after the usual long delay in getting leave to
depart, they were dismissed without the shogun's return gifts, which
were not ready, "which truly is the greatest wrong or indignity that
ever hitherto was offered to any Christians." It is almost unnecessary
to add that Cocks and Camps quarrelled. The diary ends on the 24th of
March, 1622, in the middle of the journey back to Firando; and in the
last entry Cocks tells us how the Hollanders slipped away from him. No
phrase could better express the whole course of the dealings of the
Dutch with the English in Japan.

The rest of the story of the English factory is soon told. The Council
of Defence of the East India Company at Batavia had some time before
determined to reduce it to small dimensions. In his letter of the 7th
September, 1622, Cocks records the receipt of orders "to leave off
our consortship of the Fleet of Defence with the Hollanders, and to
send our five ships for Jaccatra with as much speed as conveniently
we could"; all money and merchandise was to be withdrawn, except a
small "cargezon" or stock worth 5,000 taels, to be left in charge of
Osterwick and a couple of assistants; and Cocks, Eaton, and Sayers were
to "come along in the said ships for Jaccatra, for lessening charges in
the factory." All which directions the cape-merchant piously assured
the Company should be followed "as near as we can"; but nevertheless
stayed where he was. The difficulty, however, of getting payment of
outstanding debts was at least some excuse; and he still fondly clung
to the hopes of the China trade.

While the English were thus yielding ground, their Dutch rivals were
more energetic than ever. They had failed in an attempt to surprise
Macao; but had forcibly established themselves in the Pescadore
Islands, and they still persisted in their old offence of passing for
Englishmen. It was only a few months later that the Amboyna massacre
was perpetrated.

At last, at a consultation of the Council at Batavia on the 25th of
April, 1623, the dissolution of the English factory in Japan was
formally decided. Captain Joseph Cockram was despatched in the ship
_Bull_, invested with full powers. It was, however, left to his
discretion to allow two juniors to remain to collect debts, if there
were any prospect of recovery. He arrived at Firando in July, bearing a
letter, dated 22nd May, from the Council, directing all the members of
the factory "to come away from thence upon the ship _Bull_ for Batavia;
hereby charging you and every of you to fulfil our said order, as you
will answer the contrary at your perils." Cocks is ordered to get in
all the debts he can; and he is blamed in severe terms for the loss of
the "great sums" which he had advanced for the China trade: "The China
Nocheda[36] hath too long deluded you, through your own simplicity, to
give credit unto him. You have lived long enough in those parts to be
better experienced of the fraudulent practices of those people." The
English buildings at Firando are to be handed over to the king, to hold
in trust "until such time as we shall send thither again to repossess
the same." And so, after some other orders, the letter concludes with
a caustic admonition that, "because last year, to serve your own turn,
you made what construction you pleased of our commission for your
coming from thence, we do now iterate our commission in the conclusion
of our letter, lest, having read it in the former part thereof, you
should forget it before you come to the end."

Preparations for departure were at once made; the ostensible reasons
given to the king of Firando being the loss of ships and the bad
prospects of the China trade, and not "out of any unkind usage here in
his Majesty's [the shogun's] dominions." But, anxious as they now were
to shake themselves free of Japan, the factors were still obliged to
send up one of their number, Richard Hudson, to deliver the customary
present to the shogun; so that it was not till nearly the end of the
year that they were ready to quit Firando.

On the 16th of December, in consultation, it was determined to leave
no one behind to collect debts; but the Dutch factor was empowered to
receive any sums that might come in. The amount owing to the factory
was 12,821 taels, about £3,200, out of which Dittis was answerable for
6,636 taels, or £1,659. The following abstract[37] of a lost portion
of Cocks's diary gives us particulars of the last days spent by the
English in Japan:--

    _Abstract_ "_Coppie of some passages at our leaving Jappan and
    dissolving ye English Factory at Ferando in ye yeare 1623. Taken
    out of_ MR. RICHARD COCK _his Journall; who was Chiefe these eleven
    or 12 yeares._"

    _December 19._--Tonomon Sarume paid 100 _Tale_ on account of his
    debt of 500 _Tales_.

    _December 20._--Prepared in the Japanese language the accounts of
    the noblemen indebted to the factory, in order that the parties
    might sign them as an acknowledgment of the debt to be left with
    the Dutch chief for recovery; a power of attorney for that purpose,
    also in Japanese, being signed by all the factors and delivered to
    him. Copies of these several writings were also prepared for the
    king.

    On the 22nd these writings were delivered to the Dutch chief, Capt.
    Newrode; and the copies sent to the king. The factors "had much
    adoe with Tonomon Sama, Semidono, Taccamondono, and others, to give
    us their bills ... and, when they didd itt, put in what they list."

    On the 21st and 22nd sundry small presents in money were given to
    the Japanese servants and others, few exceeding two or three _Tale_.

    On the 22nd many of the townsmen came with their wives and families
    to take leave of the factors, some weeping at their departure.

    On the 23rd the factors went on board the ship _Bull_, intending
    to set sail; but, the Dutch and many of their Japanese friends
    coming on board with banquets, they postponed their departure;
    and, there not being room in the ship to serve up the presents of
    their friends, more than one hundred being on board, they landed at
    Cochi. Afterwards Messrs. Cock and Osterwicke proposed, as a return
    to their friends, to leave 50 _Tales_ as a banquet for them all;
    but the other factors would not agree to it.

    On the 24th, at noon, they set sail for Batavia. The same night in
    a storm the _Bull_ sprung a leak, and was found to make six inches
    of water every half-hour.

The _Bull_ reached Batavia on the 27th of January, 1624. And now poor
Cocks was indeed in trouble. In their letter of the 24th February to
the East India Company the Council of Defence accuse him of culpable
carelessness; that he neither kept the accounts himself nor appointed
others to do so; that he disobeyed orders in not leaving Japan the
year before; that he made a desperate debt of 5,000 taels with the
China captain; and that he had brought a store of trash and lumber from
Japan. No consultations had been kept, nor decorum nor order observed.
They were tempted to deal severely with him and send him home as a
malefactor; but, having consideration for his age and position, and
allowing for his bad health and testy and wayward disposition, and
being also persuaded that harsh treatment might shorten his life, they
left him to be dealt with by the Company, only ordering his goods to
be seized on his arrival in England.[38] Thus, in disgrace and broken
in health, Cocks went on board the _Ann Royal_, and on the 24th of
February sailed for England. But he was not to see his country again.
A month later, on the 27th of March, he died at sea, and was buried
"under a discharge of ordnance."

No doubt many of the charges brought against Cocks were true. Traces
of confusion in his money accounts are to be found in his diary; and
he was too easy-going for the position of head of a factory which
had so many obstacles in the way of its development. There can be no
question of his want of firmness. His many quarrels with companions
and subordinates, and the somewhat helpless way in which he records
them, afford sufficient indications of this failing. But he was
perfectly honest; he died poor; and his very weaknesses render him a
not unamusing diarist. This last qualification makes us his friend; and
we cannot accompany him through these pages without feeling good will
towards him. We note his quaint phrases; his sharp eye for "trix" and
"legerdemayne" of enemies, or for the "playing the gemeny" of doubtful
friends; how this man is angry and "takes pepper in the nose", while
another loses temper and takes a proposal "in snuff", and a third in a
rage "falls into terms"; and we see him reduced to "Hodgson's choice"
long before he ought to be, if Cambridge Hobson gave his name to the
proverb.[39] He had a taste for planting and gardening; he grew the
first potatoes in Japan; "forget not my pigeons and fishes" is an
injunction in one of his letters, when away from home; his gold fish,
presents from China, were dearly prized and not willingly given away
to the great men in Firando who coveted them--all these are pleasant
traits. Nor was he, though "unlettered" and a little unsteady when
he quoted Latin, without some taste for books. He had a _Turkish
History_[40] and a _St. Augustyn Citty of God_[41] to lend a friend (i.
118); and he received a present of an English book of _Essaies_ (i.
230). But we need not assume that he had read Chaucer because he calls
a long rambling statement a Canterbury Tale (i. 282).

His property was only worth 1,500 reals, about £300; but, in accordance
with the advice of the Council of Defence quoted above, it was seized
on the arrival of the _Ann Royal_ in England. We learn from the minutes
of the East India Company that a petition was afterwards presented
respecting Cocks's small estate:--

    "_24th Nov. 1626._--Mr. Cox, brother unto Capt. Cox that dyed
    homewarde bound in the _Anne_, presented himselfe in Court, and
    desired by peticion the favor of the Comp. concerning his brother's
    estate, to whom the Court related the debaust carriage of his
    brother and the evill service performed by him at Japan, where he
    had lived long contrarie to the Companies mind and had expended
    40,000 pounds, never returning anything to the Comp. but consuming
    whatsoever came to his hands in wastfull unnecessarie expences;
    nay, for 3 yeares togeather refused to come away when by expresse
    order from the Comp. he was called thence; insoemuch that at last
    the President and Councell [of Batavia] were inforced to send for
    him with a ship sent purposelie. And for his estate he had at the
    time of his death, the Court told him, it was very little or none
    at all, and, if any, yett not sufficient to answer the Comp. what
    he ought them, haveing confessed upon foote of his accompt at
    Jaccatra that he was indebted to the Companie £900.

    "Mr. Cox was sorry to heare this report of his brother and desired
    the Court to deale favorably with him. In the end the Court wished
    him to informe himself concerning the truth of these things from
    those that are come home; and, because the Comp. at presente have
    no leisure to examine his proceedings, they therefore willed Mr.
    Cox to returne home and leave the buisnes to Mr. Woodward to effect
    yt one his behalfe."[42]

In the end, the money was paid over by the Company to Cocks's relatives.

Scarcely anything was ever recovered from the debts owing to the
Company in Japan. The Council at Batavia, writing home on the 6th
February, 1626, announce that the Dutch factor at Firando had informed
them of the death of the Chinaman, Andrea Dittis, who had left only a
small estate to satisfy his creditors, out of which the Company was to
receive its share. All other debts were bad, and no return was to be
expected but by mere accident.

Thus was severed our connection with Japan, not to be re-united until
our own day. But the re-occupation of our factory was often proposed
and more than once attempted. Even when writing their letter just
referred to, the Council at Batavia spoke of it. Again in 1627 they
proposed it. In 1633 a freeman of the Company, named Smithwick, again
raised the question; and again in 1635 it was debated. In 1658 the
Company actually fitted three ships to re-open the trade, but the
lateness of the season and the prospect of a Dutch war caused them to
abandon the expedition. In 1664 the Company again seriously thought
of the undertaking and wrote to Bantam for information respecting the
late settlement at Firando; and it is remarkable that so soon after
our retirement so little was remembered. The reply was that "in this
factory here is not the least remembrance of your servants acting in
Japan formerly; only your agent hath procured a jornall of a voyage
made thither in 1615; but it mentions only the acting of the mariner,
nothing of the factor."[43] In 1668 a committee was appointed to
consider how trade could be re-opened, and in the next year enquiries
were again addressed to Bantam. From thence was announced a rumour that
the Dutch had tried to purchase the English buildings at Firando, but
were refused by the daimio, who was in expectation of our return! In
1670 the ship _Advance_ was sent out to Bantam, to be used in reopening
trade, if thought convenient; but she was despatched to Persia. But in
1671 two ships, the _Crown_ and _Bantam_, were actually commissioned
to make a voyage from Bantam to Taiwan and thence to Nagasaki; the
supercargoes receiving instructions to find out where the English
formerly resided at Firando and why they were removed. These vessels
were lost. The same year the agent at Bantam reported that "there are
some Scotch, Irish, etc., there [at Firando], although wee know not
by what occasion there", an interesting remark, probably referring
to descendants of the old settlers. At last the matter was seriously
taken in hand, and ships were despatched from England in 1672 with a
letter from Charles II to the emperor of Japan, every care being taken
to escape the attention of the Dutch. Those wary traders, however, did
not fail to discover the English designs; so that, when at length the
ship _Return_ arrived at Nagasaki on the 29th of June, 1673, it was
found that her coming was expected. The crew were well treated and
allowed provisions while a message was despatched to the shogun; but
the new-comers were closely watched and sharply questioned about their
religion. Again, as in Cocks's days, the cross of St. George in the
English flag gave trouble. It is interesting to find it noticed that
one of his old interpreters was still living. At last, on the 28th of
July, the shogun's decision was announced. The Dutch had taken care
to inform the Japanese of Charles's marriage with a princess of the
Roman Catholic family of Portugal; and the shogun refused to accept the
friendship of one who had allied himself with a daughter of the enemies
of Japan. So the _Return_ sailed away on the 28th of August; and, after
this, only indirect attempts to open negotiations by the mediation of
the princes of Bantam, Amoy, Taiwan, Tonquin, and Siam were made in
1681 and 1683.[44]



The social relations of the English with their Japanese neighbours
were on the whole friendly. Periodical exchanges of presents and
courtesies were the rule, although an occasional quarrel or street
row was only to be expected where so many elements of turbulence were
present in drunken sailors and factory-men. The domestic arrangements
of the English are patent enough in the pages of the diary, and appear
to have given no offence to the natives. Only on one occasion do we
read of "rhymes cast abroad and sung up and down" against the native
women at the English factory; which, moreover, Cocks attributed to
the instigation of the Dutch, "songs having been made against them
to like effect before, but not against us." They were even allowed
to hold slaves, although they were afterwards forbidden to export
them. They also appear to have kept on good terms with the princes
of the neighbouring provinces; the daimio of Satsuma being specially
noticed for his friendliness. The Dutch, on the other hand, were not
so conciliatory; and we have seen that the natives of Firando sided
with the English against them, when they attacked the English factory.
But they were richer and could afford handsomer presents; and thus had
always friends at court.

Many of the notices of native customs are interesting. The reader will
at once remark several instances of the Japanese severity in punishing
offences which our modern code regards as comparatively trivial. Death
was the penalty for the most petty theft. Cocks tells us of a boy
of sixteen who was cut in pieces with great cruelty for stealing a
little boat and taking it to another island; and again, of a man who
was "roasted to death, running round about a post, fire being made
about him", the offence being also theft of a "small bark of little
or no value" (i. 291). A curious form of degradation is mentioned in
connection with an execution on a certain occasion, when the brother of
a criminal "had the lock of his hair cut off by the hangman with the
same cattan which cut his brother in pieces" (i. 156). The difference
in European and Japanese ideas of justice was well exemplified when
the Dutch factor, complaining of an assault on one of his countrymen,
demanded that "the parties which offered the abuse might be brought to
the place where they did it and be beaten with cudgels. At which the
king smiled and said it could not be, but, if he would have them cut in
pieces, he would do it."

The custom of suicide of friends and retainers at the funeral of a
great man is referred to more than once. Saris mentions the mint-master
of Iyéyasu as "one that hath vowed that, whensoever the Emperor shall
die, he will cut his own guts and die with him."[45] No doubt he was
one of the two nobles who "killed themselves to accompany Ogosho Sama
in another world, as they think", and whose monument Cocks saw at Yedo
in 1618. In his letter of 10th December, 1614, Cocks also reports
that, at the death of old Foyne Sama, "Ushian Dono, his governor, and
two other servants, cut their bellies to bear him company";[46] and
in the curious account of the funeral of Foyne's brother, in 1621, we
are told that "one bose or priest hanged himself in a tree hard by the
place of funeral ... for boses may not cut their bellies, but hang
themselves they may". Some of the dead man's servants too were only
restrained from self-sacrifice by the king's orders; and "many others,
his friends, cut off the two foremost joints of their little fingers
and threw them into the fire to be burned with the corpse" (ii. 202).

The practice of hara-kiri, or self destruction to avoid disgrace, is
mentioned as occurring at Firando on two occasions (i. 337; ii. 136).

A few other points of interest may be noticed. The spread of
Christianity through the southern and western provinces has already
been referred to. The mother of the king of Firando is called "a
papistical Jesuit, and he and the rest of his brethren and sisters
papistical Christians" (ii. 250). Again, at the funeral of Foyne's
brother, mentioned above, it was said that a log of wood was
substituted for the real body and burned, "for he was thought to be a
Christian" (ii. 201). On the other hand, it seems that the Japanese
would not admit into their faith perverts from Christianity, for an
Englishman "went and cut his hair after the pagan fashion, thinking to
turn pagan; which he could not do here, although he would" (i. 179).
The changing of names, which gives so much trouble in reading Japanese
history, is often mentioned. Figen a Sama is at first called Tome Sama;
and some of his relatives appear suddenly under new names in 1621 (ii.
169). The caboques, or dancing bears as Cocks calls them, that is,
the dancing women or players, and their male companions, are present
at every large entertainment mentioned in the diary. And, lastly,
the readiness of the Japanese to adopt foreign customs is curiously
exemplified in the rapidity with which tobacco-smoking spread among the
people. "It is strange", says Cocks, writing in 1615, "to see how these
Japons, men, women, and children, are besotted in drinking that herb;
and not ten years since it was in use first." When once the habit had
got such a hold, no measures for the destruction of the plant could
change it. The "drinking" inevitably went on, and in 1619 the burning
of half a town is ascribed to it.



In conclusion I should mention that one of the chief difficulties with
which I have had to contend in editing these volumes has been that of
finding explanations of the foreign words and terms in the diary. Cocks
adopted words from other languages besides Japanese, and generally
wrote them down as they sounded. Hence it was no easy matter for one
ignorant of eastern languages to decide whether particular words, thus
disguised, are Japanese or of some other tongue; and I fear that I have
too often taxed the patience and good nature of my orientalist friends
for solutions of these difficulties. It is with pleasure that I take
this opportunity of thanking Dr. William Anderson, whose knowledge of
the language of Japan is so extensive, and my colleagues Dr. Charles
Rieu and Professor R. K. Douglas, for much valuable assistance. I
also gratefully acknowledge kind help and many courtesies from Mr.
Charles C. Prinsep, Superintendent of the Records, and Mr. Edward J.
Wade, Assistant-Librarian, in the India office; and from Mr. W. Noel
Sainsbury, of the Public Record Office.

  BRITISH MUSEUM,

                                                _30th December, 1882_.




           SOME JAPANESE AND OTHER FOREIGN WORDS AND TERMS.


  bongew (_Jap._ bugiyo).--a superintendent.

  bose (_Jap._ bodsu).--a Buddhist priest.

  bubes, or beobs (_Jap._ biyo-bu).--screens, or pictures.

  caboque (_Jap._ kabu, singing and dancing).--a dancing girl.

  calambac.--aloe wood.

  cape-merchant (_Span._ cabo).--head-merchant.

  captain more (_Port._ capitão mór).--captain-in-chief.

  catabra (_Jap._ katabira).--a summer robe.

  catan (_Jap._ katana).--a sword.

  chaw (_Jap._ cha).--tea.

  chawne.--a lot of land, or house.

  dairi (_Jap._).--the mikado.

  danko (_Jap._).--consultation.

  fanna (_Jap._ hana).--a present to a dancing girl.

  fibuck.--silver once refined.

  foyfone (_Jap._ fune).--a boat.

  fro (_Jap._ furo).--a bath-room.

  futtaqui (_Jap._ hotoke, an idol).--a temple.

  gadong, or gedong (_Bengali_ gudam).--a shop, or warehouse.

  goca (_Jap._ koku).--a dish.

  goshon (_Jap._ gosha).--a pass, or licence.

  jurebasso.--an interpreter.

  kerimon (_Jap._ koromo).--a robe.

  kitesoll (_Span._ quitasól).--a parasol.

  langanack (_Jap._ naginata).--a lance, or halberd.

  makary (_Jap._ makiye).--lacquer.

  morofack.--a spirit or wine.

  muche (_Jap._ mochi).--a cake.

  neremon (_Jap._ norimono).--a sedan-chair.

  nifon catange (_Jap._ katachi).--after fashion of Japan.

  ropshake (_Jap._ roku-shaku).--a chair bearer.

  sappon.--a kind of wood.

  sequanseque (_Jap._ sakadzuki).--a cup.

  sing.--a wine.

  soma.--a junk.

  somo.--double-refined silver.

  tabi (_Jap._).--a stocking.

  tattamy (_Jap._ tatami).--a mat; a measure.

  tono (_Jap._).--a lord, or petty king.

  wacadash (_Jap._ wakizashi).--a short sword.




                               ERRATA.


  Vol. i., page  3. Note[55] should be "allowaies==aloes".
   "        "    8. Note[70] should be "Plate once melted".
   "        "   13. Delete the latter part of note[77].
  Vol. ii., "  136. Note² should be "The arquebuse à croc; the croc
                    being a hook or tooth, generally under the muzzle,
                    but sometimes fitted to a sliding ring, whereby the
                    piece was steadied when fired."




                                DIARY

                                  OF

                            RICHARD COCKS.




                       DIARY OF RICHARD COCKS.

    THE JOURNALL OR DAILYE BOOK OF ALL ACCURRANTES HAPPENYNG, BEGUN AT
    FIRANDO, IN JAPON, PER ME RIC. COCKS, LE 1TH DAY OF JUNE, 1615,
    STILO VETRI.


_June 1._--We bought 5 greate square postes of the kinges master
carpenter; cost 2 _mas_ 6 _condrins_[47] per peece. And I delivered
unto Nicholas Martyn one small bar gould, cost eight riall of eight[48]
and a half, is six _taies_ eight _mas_, for which he is answerable.
Also I delivered a great bar gold, poz. fowre _taies_ and fowre _mas_
and two _condrins_, rated at fiftie and five _taies_ as yt cost;
and is to send to Gapt. Whowe, the Capt. Chinas[49] brother, at
Langasaque;[50] to geve in a present at a christning, as apereth per
advice.

Also I paid, per Mr. Nealson, for washing linen, two _mas_ 6 _condrins_.

And late within night Mr. Wickham arived here in company of Damian
Marines, and brought word the junck was at Goto, they being put from
Liquea[51] to have proceaded on their voyage for Syam; but, being at
sea, the unruly companie would have gon for Cochinchina, and so Mr.
Wickham standing against it, remembring our former losse theare (as
I gave hym in comition), they retorned back for these partes. Capt.
Adames hath wrot me that the boateswaine and carpenter are in most
falte, being mutenouse knaves, etc.

_June 2._--Capt. Adames and Ed. Sayer wrot me 2 letters from Goto of
30th May; and Mr. Adames sent me a bag of potatos, and Ed. Sayer sent
me a pece lik lynen (or rather silk) and the lyke to Mr. Eaton and Mr.
Nealson. And Mr. Wickham gave me a jar of potatos. And Damian Marines
brought me a dish of plantians and another of pottatos, etc. I receved
a letter from Jno. de Lievano, the Spaniard. And Mr. Wickham went and
visited Bongo Dono,[52] and carid hym a present of 2 pec. Liquea cloth
and a dish of pottatos; and tould hym how matters stood about our
junck, and withall asked his counsell, whether it were best to let our
junck stay at Goto to be trymbd, or else to bring her for Firando. And
his opynion was (as many others are the lyke, and among the rest my
selfe) that it is best to bring her for Firando, for divers occations.

We had news to day that Ogosho Samme hath taken the fortres of Osekey
and overthrown the forses of Fidaia Samme.[53] Others say that most of
the forses of Fidaia Samme issued out of the fortrese, and sallid out
3 leagues toward Miaco, but were encountred by the Emperours forses
and put to the worse, many of them being slaughtered and the rest
driven back into the fortresse, etc. Bongo Dono sent a bark this day to
Crates[54] to bring him the certenty of the newse.

_June 3._--I thought good to note downe that a padre or Jesuit came
to the English howse and said his name was Tomas and a Bisken by
nation, and gave it out he was a merchant; and others gave hym the
name of Captain. Yet I knew what he was, having seen hym in this howse
before, etc. He beged a littell alloes[55] of me, which I gave hym,
as I did the like when he was here before. For you must understand
that these padres have all the gifte of beging, and allwais answer:
"Sea por l'amor de dios." This is a generall note to know them by,
for they cannot so counterfet but that word will still be thrust out.
This padre, Tomas (or Capt.), tould me that they stood in dowbt that
the King of Shashma[56] would destroy Langasaque and bring all these
partes beloe Shiminaseque[57] under his subiection, as being geven him
by Fidaia Samme; but I believe it not, for now word is com on a sudden
that all the streets must be made cleane, for that the King of Shashma
is expected to be heare this night, he being bound up with great forces.

_June 4._--We bought 40 boardes at 5 per _mas_, small plate; and 4
_cacas_[58] at 12 _condrins_ peece, small plate.

And about nowne we had news that the King of Shashma was coming into
this road with 500 barks full of souldiers; soe we laid out a present
for him as followeth:--

                                                      _ta.  ma. co._
  8 pec. rich damasks of Lankin,[59] cost 16 _taies_
  per peece is                                          48   0    0
  10 pec. byrams nill of 15 Rs. per _corge_[60] is      05   6    4
  10 pec. red zelas, of 12 Rs. per _corg_ is            04   8    0
  10 pec. whit baftas, viz., 6 of 11, and 4 of 9 Rs
  _corg_ is                                             04   0    8
  10 pec. of duttis[61] of 12 Rs. per _corge_           04   8    0

                     Som totall amontes unto            67   3    2


Soe, Mr. Wickham accompanying me, we went and delivered the present,
which he took in good parte, offring our nation favorable entertaynment
yf we came to traffick in his domynions. I put out a word how the
Liqueans refuse to let us trym our junk to have proceaded from thence
on our voyag for Syam;[62] but he said littell thereto, but answered,
at his retorne he wold talke with me and geve me a present. I said I
had receved suffition at his highnes hands in havinge the good hap to
see the face of soe mightie a king as the King of Shashma; whereat he
smiled. And soe we craved lycence and retorned.

Bongo Dono was with hym before and gave hym a present, and came from
hym as we went to hym; but we had byn with hym before hym, yf he had
not sent a boate to call us back till he had first vizeted hym.

And at present a letter is com to Bongo Dono from Faccatay,[63] wherin
he is advized that the Emperour hath overthrowne the forses of Fidaia
Samme, soe that he, his mother, and child have cut their bellies; but
that his wife is sent back to her father Shongo Samme, King of Edo and
to succeed in the Empire.[64]

_June 5._--There came letters from the King of Firando to Bongo Dono,
that it is true that the Emperour hath overthrowne the forcese of
Fidaia Samme, and taken the fortres of Osekey, and entred into it the
6th day of this moone, Fidaia Samme and his mother with his sonne
having cut their bellies, etc.

Mr. Wickham went and visited Oyen Dono, and carid hym a dish of
pottatos and a peec of Liquea cloth. His brother retorned from above,
whilst Mr. Wickham was theare, and confermed these newes to be true.

_June 6._--I wrot an other letter to Jorge Durois to look out for a
marchant to buy our wheate, as also of the confermyng the newes from
above.

There was one of the King of Shashmas barkes cast away coming in, but
all the men saved. We bought 1 _caca_ or squar post, cost 1 _mas_. We
delivered or sent to keep to Capt. China 51 bundelles great canes, in
each are 30 canes.

_June 7._--After dyner came a Franciskan frire, called Padre
Appolonario, whom I had seene 2 or 3 tymes in Firando heretofore. He
was in the fortres of Osekey[65] when it was taken, and yet had the
good happ to escape. He tould me he brought nothing away with hym
but the clothes on his back, the action was soe sudden; and that he
marvelled that a force of above 120,000 men (such as was that of Fidaia
Samme) should be soe sowne overthrowne. He desired me for God's sake to
geve hym somthing to eate, for that he had passed much misery in the
space of 15 daies, since he departed out of the fortres of Osekey. So,
after he had eaten, I gave hym 15 _mas_ in plate; and soe he departed.

We had 1830 tiles this day for ston walles.

_June 8._--Yt is said the King of Shashma hath geven order to his
people to retorne back for their cuntrey; I meane the most parte of
them. The rest he keepeth to carry along with hym to goe vizet the
Emperour.

We bought 4 _cacas_, cost 7 _condrins_ per peec, small plate, etc.

_June 8._--I sent to borow 4 or 5 _gantas_[66] of oyle of Yasimon Dono,
because I could get non in any other place. But he retorned answer he
had non, when I know, to the contrary, he bought a parcell out of my
handes the other day. And I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois to take heed
he gave out no yll reportes of Safian Dono. The China Capt. lent us 6
great mesurs (or _gantas_) of oyle, to repay as much. And Semidones
steward came in the abcense of his master to borow a bar of plate of 3
_taies_ wight, which was lent hym.

_June 9._--Late within night I receved a letter from Ed. Sayer, dated
in the Roade of Casnora in the Island of Goto, the 7th currant,
wherin he writ the junck wold com away for this towne of Firando by
first wind. Jno. Japon brought this letter, but is sick of the French
disease, and took up his lodging at an other howse.

_June 10._--I receved a letter from Jorge Durois, dated the 17th of
June, new stile, in Langasaque, with a baskit of aprecockes for my
selfe, and an other for Bongo Dono, and a therd for his wife, with
a parcell in a bag for the China Capten; all which were delivered
according to advice.

A Spaniard called Pablo Garrocho de la Vega came to this towne of
Firando to-day and brought Jorges letter.

And before nowne word came that our junck was seene without. Soe I made
ready to boate to goe out to Cochi to see them put in harbor, and to
vizet Capt. Adames, etc.

_June 11._--Our juncke, the _Sea Adventure_, arived in the Bay of
Cochi in Firando at 10 cloth (_sic_) the last night, haveing lost her
voyage for Syam this yeare. I went abord, and carid a barill of wyne,
a quarter pork, and 10 loves bread, with a box bankiting stuffe; and,
by order of the governer, carid 3 _bongews_,[67] to looke the mariners
were all retorned and had used their indeavours. Capt. Adames was
unwilling we should bring any mans name in question, for geting us an
ill report; soe I did let it pas for that tyme. But being enformed that
Damian Marines hath bought up 8 or 10 _cattis_[68] of amber greese at
Liqueas, forstalling all, that the Company could get non; wherupon
I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames to make stay of his chist, for that
I wold bring the matter in question before the justice, and to same
effect wrot an other letter to Damian hym selfe.

And Capt. Garrocho, the Bisken, sent me a peare of crimson silk
stockinges for a present.

And Mr. Nealson reconed with the carpenters labourers and other matters
bought for building since the 21st of May till this night, viz.:--

  Pro tymber, oyle, and other matters as per perticulers 14  2  6 _con._
  Pro 457½ days labourers work, at 5 _con._ per day      20  4  4
  Pro carpenters wages, as per perticulers               23  4  4

            Som totall amontes unto                      58  1  4


_June 12._--Damian Marines came ashore, and tould me Capt. Adames had
staid his chist with the amber, and that he had receved my letter,
wherby he knew the occation. I answered hym I did it for my own
discharg, he being a hired servant, and therfore, by the lawes of God
and man, ought to look out for the benefite of them which gave hym
meate, drynke, and wages. And by fortune Capt. Garrocho was in company
when I debated the matter with hym. Soe I referred the matter to hym
and Capt. Adames to make an end of it, and I to stand to what they
ordayned; and soe wrot to Capt. Adames what was determined betwixt us,
but wished hym to take true notis how many _cattis_ amber he had, and
to keepe possession of it, etc.

I understood Damian went after to Capt. Jacob Speck,[69] unto whome
(as it should seeme) he had offerd to sell all his amber; and so he
retorned abord the junck, and Capt. Speck followed hym with a pretence
to vizet Capt. Adames, but rather to hunt after amber greese. God grant
Capt. Adames be not guld by them, etc.

I receved 16 boates lading of wheate ashore this day, containing 1,198
sacks, is 300 _gocos_, wanting 2 sack laid out in henne meate. And Mr.
Wickham brought all the merchandiz ashore which they had for the Syam
voyage, but divers of our pikes had the heads stolne ofe.

_June 13._--I receved back of Mr. Ric. Wickham a greate bag of plate
in bars of Lucas Antoinsons, containing seven hundred forty and eight
_taies_ in bars and _fibuck_.[70] And I delivered fyftie _taies_ in
plate of barse to Mr. Nealson. And I receved two _cattis_ of amber
greese of Mr. Ric. Wickham, which he bought for the Worshipfull Company
at Liquea. And I receved 3 letters from Capt. Adames, how Damian Marin
set hym at nought and wold not shew hym any amber; so I retorned hym
answer not to let hym cary his chist ashore, but to bring it to the
English howse, which Capt. Adames did, but Damian came not with it.

Also I receved 2½ _cattis_ amber of Ed. Sayer, in halves, betwixt hym
and me; but he willed to take it all, for that he had need to use money
heare.

_June 14._--Capt. Garrocho delivered Andrea Dittis, the China Capt.,
his papers of 1,080 and od _taies_ he owed hym, as being suretie for
an other, and left it to the said Chinas discretion to pay or geve hym
what he wold. When we came to open Damians chist, there was nothing to
be found in it. He is a craftie knave. And soe let hym goe.

The new botswayn of the junck brought me 2 Liquea brushes and a box of
synamon of same place, the best that ever I saw in my life. And Jno.
Japan, our _jurebasso_,[71] brought me a present of Liquea cloth, one
peec. He hath byn in this place a wick, and never came into the English
howse till now, but many tymes passed before the dore singing like a
luneticke man. Soe I put hym out of the Companies service, or he rather
put hym selfe out.

_June 15._--Jno. Gorezan the _jurebassos_ wife brought a present of
Japan apels, or rather other frute lyke appells. Capt. Adames sent me
a letter from abord the junck at Cochi to have the kinges master shipp
carpenter com to hym, to confer whether it were fitest to trym her at
Cochi or bring her to Firando. Damian sent me 2 _cattis_ amber by Capt.
Adames, rated at 90 _taies_ per _catty_, resonable good, but had byn
watered. And I receved back two chistes money of Mr. Wickham, wherin he
sayeth ther is aleven bagges R. of 8, of 500 R. of 8 in eache bagg; but
I opened not the chistes.

_June 16._--I sent a letter to Capt. Adames by master carpenter to
Cochi, about finding out a place to trym our junck in. And I delivered
1 sack wheate to the baker, to pay in bread as we sell the rest. And
I had 1 peec Liquea cloth of Mr. Wickham to make Co Jno. of Goto a
_catabra_.[72] We had much flying news to-day that Shongo Samme was
dead. Others said it was Calsa Samme, his brother. Others reported
Fidaia Samme to be alive, and that many _tonos_[73] were gon to hym
to take his part. But I esteem all this to be fables. Yet others geve
out secretly that the Emperour ment to chang the government of all
these partes, and put other _tonos_ in their places. Soe that these of
Firando dowbt the retorne of their king.

Tome, my boy, carid out his chist and thought to have run away; but I
prevented hym, yet turned hym out of dores with a _catabra_ on his back
as he entred in. He thought to have pickt the lock of my money chist
the other day, and had so wrong the wardes that I could not open the
lock with my key, which made me to trune (_sic_) hym out of my chamber.
But he, misdowbting ferther disgrace, thought to have carid away all
his aparell and have geven me the slip.

The purcer of junck gave me 10 Liquea trenchers for a present.

_June 17._--I receved a letter from Capt. Adames from Cochi, wherin he
adviseth me that he hath taken counsell about the place most fittest to
trym our junck in, and findeth Cochi to be the place.

I delivered Mr. Richard Wickham the rich _cattan_[74] he left in my
custody at his departure towardes Siam. The purcer of the junck gave
me a greate Liquea cock for a present, which I sent to Bongo Dono, he
being desyrous to have hym.

I wrot Capt. Adames answer of his letter receved this day. And I sould
1,175 sackes wheate (brought from the Liqueas) unto Damian Marin, at 3
_mas_ per sack, containing 25 _gantes_ Liquea measure, to be paid in
amber grees, at 115 _taies_ the _catty_, to take 5 _cattis_ and pay the
rest in ready money.

                                                      _ta. ma.  co._
  The wheate amontes to                                352   5   0

  5 _cattis_ amber, at 115 _tais_ per _catty_, amontes
  to                                                    575   0   0
  2 _cattis_ amber, at 90 _tais_ per _catty_, amontes
  to                                                    180   0   0

      Som totall, 7 _cattis_ amber greese, amontes to   755   0   0

_June 18._--Capt. Adames came ashore to dyner, having unrigged the
junck at Cochi. He gave me a present of 3 nestes _gocas_,[75] with
their trenchers and ladells of mother of perle, with 10 spoons same,
and a peece of white Liquea cloth.

I receved a letter from Jorge Durois, dated in Langasaque, le 22nd of
June, new stile, wherin he advized me that no one man would buy all
our wheate till the shiping come from the Manillias. He wrot me that
above 2,600 persons are dead in Langasaque this yeare of the smallpox,
amongst whome his boy Domingo and a woman slave are two, since he wrot
me his last letter.

_June 19._--I wrote a letter to Mr. Eaton, sent per _sea bongew_. The
contentes appeare per coppie. Also I wrot other 2 letters in Japon to
our 2 hostes at Osekey and Sackey in kynd wordes, hoping they have
dealt well with us in saveing our goods, though the towns be burned.

I tooke a garden this day and planted it with pottatos brought from
the Liquea, a thing not yet planted in Japan. I must pay a _tay_, or 5
shillings sterling, per annum for the garden. And we bought 40 _gants_
of shark oyle for the junk, cost 1 _mas_ and two _condrins_ the _gant_.
And one of the mareners of the junck brought me 2 fishes for a present.

_June 20._--

                                                         _ta. mas._
  We receaved 4 _catis_ 4 _tais_ 2 _mas_ wight, amber
    greese, of Damian, cost                                490  1
  With 2 _cattis_ before rated at                          180  0

        Som totall amontes unto                            670  1


I gave hym a bill of my hand for soe much money owing hym, to receve
our wheate at price before made, and rest in ready money.

And news came from King of Firando that he arived at Miaco the 18th of
the last moone, and was admitted awdience with the Emperour the 20th,
whoe used hym in all kindnes, which causeth much rejoysing here. Also
the Emperour hath given order into all partes of Japon to look out for
such as escaped out of the fortres of Osekey when it was burned. Soe
that prive enquirie was mad in all howses in Firando what strangers
were lodged in eache howse, and true notis thereof geven to the
justice. Yt is thought the padres at Langasaque and else where will be
narrowly looked after. They say the taking of this fortres hath cost
above 100,000 mens lives on the one parte and other, and that on the
Prince Fidaia Sammes parte no dead man of accompt is found with his
head on, but all cut ofe, because they should not be knowne, to seek
reveing aganst their frendes and parents after. Nether (as som say) can
the body of Fidaia Samme be fownd; soe that many think he is secretly
escaped. But I canot beleev it. Only the people of these sothern parts
speake as they wold have it, because they affeckt the yong man more
than the ould.

_June 21._--I sent a letter to Capt. Adames in answer to one of his
receved yisterday from Cochi, wherin he advised he bought 200 _gantes_
of shark oyle at Goto at 1 _mas_ per _ganto_, wishing me to buy no more
till he saw whether we had need of it or no.

I gave Tome my boy a _wacadash_[76] and most parte of his clothes, with
5 _mas_ in money, at the instigation of the China Capten. And Capt.
Speck had 50 _cattis_ tyn in 46 bars, to pay as wee sell the rest, or
else to content. And Mr. Nealson paid for 23 matts for new rowmes 6
_ta._ 7 _ma._ 4 _con._, with 2 _mas_ 5 _con._ comprehended for boate
hier.

And I receaved a letter from the _Dico_ of Ikanoura[77] advising me
that he wold com or send to me to make price for plank or tymber which
we should have need of. Unto which letter I retorned answer.

Ed. Sayer put away his ould man, and entertayned Co Jno. my ould boy of
Langasaque.

One of the kinges men came and tould me the perticulers of the news
above, and that Fidaia Sammes mother was fownd dead, and his sonne
alive, being a child of 8 years ould, whoe was carid to the Emperour
his grandfather; but the body of Fidaia could not be fownd, soe it is
thought he was burned to ashes in a tower in the fortres burned.

_June 22._--We put Yoske the cook away, haveing over many laysy felloes
in howse, and he 1 that could do littell or nothing, yet still runing
abroad. Mr. Nealson paid hym to cleare his reconyng 8 _ta._ 7 _ma._ 7
_condr._ And we receved 50 greate tiles this day. And there was a _tay_
paid for a years rent potato garden. And Facheman, our skullion, had a
parte of his wages paid by Mr. Nealson, three _taies_ in small plate.

_June 23._--I sent a letter to Jorge Durois by Symon _jurebasso_, in
answer of his of the 22th June, new stile, and how I had sould the
wheate to Damian Marine; and sent my clock by Symon to be mended; and
gave hym order buy som conserves, to invite the king at his retorne,
we haveing made an end of building our howse. Miguel _jurebassos_ wife
brought Capt. Adames a _catabra_, a barell wine, and figges, for a
present.

_June 24._--Som of Firando barks retorned from Miaco, as others did the
lyke into all partes of Japon, only the _tonos_ (or king) of each parte
stay with the Emperour to take _danco_[78] or counsell of what shall
be thought needfull; the souldiers being all sent home, the wars being
ended.

Also I receved a letter from our _bungew_ Ushanuske Dono, dated in
Miaco le 24th of Gongwach (or the moone past), wherin he writes me how
well the Emperour receved the King of Firando his master; and that a
sonne of Fidaia Samme of 7 years ould, by a band woman, was put to
death by the Emperours comand; and 100 _mas_ and 150 _mas_ a head of
all them which were in the fortres; soe that dailie many are brought in
and slaughtered.

_June 25._--There passed divers boates with men from Fingo[79] and
Shashma to goe to Osekey to make cleane the fortres, and, as it is
said, they begyn to build the cittie of Osekey and Sackay againe,
the Emperour having geven order that yf the former owners will not
forthwith new build their howses, that any other may enter upon the
_chaune_ (or plot) and build upon it.

_June 26._--Our fishmonger is run away this night and hath stolne a
boate of his neighbors. He was here yisterday very ernest with our
_jurebasso_ to have procured me to have lent hym 10 or 20 _tais_,
and in the end desyred hym to have lent hym but one _taie_, but was
deceaved of his expectation. And we bought 1_c._ 9_ta._ 8_ma._ amber
greese of Mr. Wickham for the Wor. Company at 100 _taies_ the _catty_.

Bongo Dono sent to me to have had a jar of Liquea wyne (or _rack_), for
that the Emperour hath sent to him to com to Miaco, and therfore he
sought for such matters to geve in present to grete men for a noveltie.

All the kinges barks are com back with the souldiers; only the
nobillety of all provinces stay with the Emperour. So it is dowbted
ther will be trucking (or changing of kingdoms); and that which maketh
me the rather to belive it is the Emperours sending for this man who
is the last man of the blood royall left behind the king, he being the
kinges greate uncle and brother to the deceased king Foyne Samme, and
is a bursen[80] man and therefore not fit to be emploied in service, he
being above 60 yeares ould.

And there was flying speeches how the Hollanders had a man kild and
much money taken in cominge downe from Miaco; but Capt. Speck sent me
word (I having first advized hym what I heard) that ther was no such
matter, for that at instant he had receved a letter from their people
that they were in a port neare unto Shiminasaque, selling goodes and
expecting wind and wether to com for Firando. And ther is a Japan junk
arived at Langasaque from Phillippinas, which wintred theare the last
yeare.

_June 27._--Matias the Flemyng retorned from Miaco to Firando; but we
have no letter from Mr. Eaton, which maketh me to dowbt legerdymeane.

Also Chombo Donos man (a Caffro) came from Miaco with a letter for Oyen
Dono, and brought word his master was cominge downe for Langasaque,
and that Safian Dono was ordayned _tono_ (or king) of Arima.[81] This
Caffro I gave lodging to in the English howse with meate and drinke,
because he was servant to such a master.

_June 28._--We delivered 500 sackes of wheate to Damian Marin, viz.,
440 out of our gedong and 60 out of that of Capt. China; so we want 1
sack in our gedonge.

And I receaved a packet of letters from Syam, viz., one from Mr. Lucas
Antoinson of 14th of Aprill, 1 from Mr. Jno. Gourney of the 17th of
Aprill. Also 2 ould letters from Bantam, viz., 1 from Generall Saris
of 6 February 1613, 1 from Mr. Georg Bale of 8 Marche, with an other
humerous letter to Mr. Tempest Peacock, and the lyke to Mr. Ric.
Wickham, as Mr. Bale is accustomed to doe.

There were two junckes arived at Langasaque from Syam.

_June 29._--Upon good consideration, per general consent, I sent Jno.
Pheby to Mr. Eaton with letters and to accompany hym downe and procure
the Emperours passe for hym, yf need required; which I willed Capt.
Adames to signefie unto Codskin Dono or Goto Zazabra Dono; and gave Mr.
Eaton order to com away forthwith, and bring in short endes what he
could, and to chang the yello in white at Miaco. This letter was dated
the 27th, but kept till 29th present. Also I sent 3 letters to our host
of Edo and hym of Shrongo,[82] with the 3d for Sr. Andrea; as also 1
for Miguel _jurebasso_.

And the brother of Sugien Dono of Umbra[83] retorned from the wars and
brought me a present of 5 Japan fans.

And I sent an other letter per Jno. Pheby to Oshanusque Dono in answer
of his receaved 4 daies past from Miaco.

Capt. Speck and Sr. Matias came to vizet me.

_June 30._--Mr. Nealson paid 10 _taies_ plate bars to Jno. Pheby, and I
delivered hym my letters for Mr. Eaton, with the others for Caseror and
Oshenosque Dono. And Capt. Adames wrot to Cogsque Dono and Goto Zazabra
Dono, to renew our passe yf need require, as also to dispach Mr. Eaton
away, yf knaves stay hym.

Jno. Jooson arived heare from Miaco, and Unagense Dono and Sugien Dono
the lyke. And I sent our _jurebasso_ to bid them welcom hom, as the
lyke to Jno. Yoosen. And sowne after Sugien Dono came to vizet me with
a present of 10 fannes, and repeated the story of the wars, and how
all the nobillety of Japon were joyned together at Miaco to viset the
Emperour Ogosho Samme, which was a marvelous thing to see the hudge
number of them.

_July 1._--I went and viseted Bongo Dono, he being ready to goe for
Miaco; and carid hym 2 barills _morofack_[84], a basket of biskit, 50
roles drid _bonita_,[85] and 5 cords of drid cuttel fish. He took it in
good parte, with offer of many faire words.

I also envited Capt. Speck, John Yoosen, and the rest of the Duch
to dyner to morrow. And wrot a letter to Figien Samme, the King of
Firando, to Miaco, in complimentall sort, as also advising how our
junk had lost her voyag to Syam and was retorned to Firando from the
Liqueas. Also, I advised hym how ye King of Ava, of the race of Pegew,
had made wars 7 yeares, and in the space gotten 8 other kingdoms, which
in tymes past belonged to the empier of Pegu; and wantes now only to
conquer Siam, Lanfu, and Camboia, to make hym selfe a greater prince
then ever any of his ansesters was, and thought very easy to obtayne
it, in respect of his valientnesse and mighty power.

_July 2._--I receved 2 letters from Capt. Garrocho and Jorge Durois, of
the 8th and 10th currant, new stile, werin they wrot me as apeareth per
their letters; but much falce news per Capt. Garrochos letter, yf my
ame be not amis.

And Capt. Speck, with Jno. Yoosen, Sr. Matias, Jacob Swager, cam to
dyner to day; and Jno. Yoosen told us a great history of Ogosho Sammas
good luck in preveling against Fidaia Samme, and that he verely thinkes
he is dead in the fortrese burned to ashes.

Mr. Wickham deliverd me an accompt of Syam voyage, resting to ballance
132 _ta._ 3 _m._ 3 _co._, but delivered up no money, as he spesyfied in
his answer, because I owe hym for amber greese, for 1 _cat._ 9 _ta._ 8
_m._ wight, at 100 _tais catty_, 161 _ta._ 2 _m._ 5 _co._

_July 3._--Capt. Speck and the rest sent to thank me for their good
entertaynment, viz., _nifon catange_.[86]

_July 4._--Jno. Yoosen sent me a drid salmon and divers peeces salmon
in pickell for a present.

_July 5._--Jno. Jossen came to vizet me to-day, with 5 men wayting on
hym.

We bought 6 saks rise, per Capt. Adames meanes, at 4 _gantos_ per _mas_
plate in bars. I and Ed. Sayer wayed the 3 _cattis_ amber we had in
halves, and fownd it wanted 7 _taies_, lacking 2 _mas_ in wight.

Her was news (or reporte) geven out that Tushma Tay hath burned Edo in
the abcence of the Emperour, he haveing left hym prisoner ther under
the keeping of a yong man, for that he denied to fight against Fidaia
Samme, the sonne of Ticus Samme his master. But I think this will prove
a lye, as most Japan news comonly doe.

_July 6._--A Japon telors wife brought me a present of paper. She
spoake Spanish, and sought to procur work for her husband.

_July 7._--Here is reports that the Emperour hath staid the King of
Shashma and all the _tonos_ of these partes, and pretendeth to shifte
them out of their governmentes (or kingdoms), and put them into other
provinces to the northward, and them of the northern parts in their
places. But I rather (in parte) esteem it to be the escape of Fidaia
Samme, whoe may ly in secret in som of their cuntries, expecting
opertunety and their retorns; which to prevent, he keepeth them by hym
till he can understand the certen truth whether he be alive or dead.

We had newes that all men that entred into Langasaque were staid theare
and not sufferd to retorne out of the towne. The reason is thought to
be to look out for such as came out of the fortrese of Osekey; but I
rather esteem it to be to serche out Fidaia Samme, which is thought to
be escaped.

Also, one of the king (or _tonos_) men of this place came and tould me
that his master had sent for 15 or 20 men of these partes to com unto
hym, which maketh me now verely to think that he will be shifted out of
his government or kingdom.

_July 8._--Ther was paid yisterday, per Mr. Nealson, to Yayemon Dono,
the kinges ship carpenter, in parte of payment of 150 shething plankes
for the junck, at 4 _mas_ per planck of 3 fathom and a halfe per peece.

I sent Unagense Dono 2 barrills wyne and 4 fishes, he being retorned
from wars, and now sick of small pox.

_July 9._--I understand that yisterday the Hollanders cut a slave
of theirs apeeces for theft, per order of justice, and thrust their
_comprador_ (or cats buyer) out of dores for a lecherous knave, who,
with hym that is dead, have confessed of much goods (as cloves, mace,
pepper, and stuffs) which are stolne per consent of Jacob Swager; which
maketh much sturr in the Duch howse. Yet I think this cates buyer
plaieth the knave and defameth Jacob, because he was the occation he
was thrust out of servyce for haveing to do with his woman, the knave
being a marid man.

Also Capt. Adames receved a letter from Melchor van Sanfort from
Langasaque, wherin he adviseth hym that a Japon wold sell us an other
junck, and to that purpose conselled us to lay up ours. But I had
rather som man would buy her, for I had rather sell then buy, for I
have enough of Japon juncks, yf I knew how to better it.

_July 10._--We had news of 2 China _somas_[87] arived at Goto. Soe the
China Capt. sent a boate to know whence they are.

Also the China Capt. got Capt. Adames to write a letter to Damian to
buy 400 sackes wheate for hym at price they cost, he haveing offerd it
at same price to hym before, viz., at 3 _mas_ per sack.

And I was enformed that Figen Samme, the king of this place, had sent a
letter to Bunga Dono, how it was thought the Emperour would make Chambo
Dono _bongew_ of Arima, Langasaque, and Firando, that is to say, of
all these sotherne parts. He which sent me word of it was Sugen Dono
of Umbra, unto whome I sent a present of 2 barills wyne and 4 fishes,
_nifon catange_. And he sent his man afterwards to thank me for it.

Also Damian retorned from Langasaque, and Symon that was our
_jurebasso_ the lyke, and brought me my lock back. I gave Mat 1_cat._
tobaco, cost 5 _condrins_. Bongo Dono went for Miaco this day.

_July 11._--I receved a letter from Capt. Garrocho, complementall,
dated in Langasaque, le 18th of July, new stile.

The China Captain, Andrea Dittis, came to me and brought a letter he
had receaved from his brother out of China: how our busynes consernyng
procuring a trade into China was in greate hope to take effect, for
that the greate men had taken 3,000 _pezos_[88] presented them to make
way; and that at present the ould king was about to resigne up his
place to his sonne, and therefore best to let it rest a while till the
ould man were out of place, or else it would be duble charg to geve to
father and sonne. Also his cheefe kinsman, whoe is neare unto the king,
advised that in no hand it should not be geven out that we came out of
Japon, for that the hatred against Japons was worse then against any
other nation; but rather to say we came directly out of England, or
from Bantam, Siam, Camboia, or Cochinchina, etc.

Also there is a China com out of the Manillias from Cagallion, and
reporteth that the Hollanders have taken a place in the Philippinas
called Shibou; and that, upon this news, all the Spaniards went from
Cagallion to defend Manillia, as being the place of most emportance.
Also he reported that Don Juan de Silva, Governor of the Manillias, was
secretly slipt away, hearing another was coming to take his place; but
I esteem this a lye. Yet out of doubt he is hated of the most parte,
both Spaniardes and naturalls, for his covetosnes, as having scraped
a world of wealth together, he card not how, so he compassed it, as I
have byn tould by Spaniardes and others, etc.

_July 12._--I sent a present to Taccaman Dono, cheefe _bongew_, viz., 2
barills wyne, 5 bundls dry cuttell, and 5 pec. drye _bonita_, which he
took in good parte.

_July 13._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton, per the purcer of our junck.
Also I wrot 2 other to our hostes of Osekey and Sackey per same
conveance. We had much ado to apeace a dispute betwixt the Capt. China
and Damian for wheate bought, but I entred pledg for China Capt.

Capt. Speck went abord their junck to take vew of her, to sett her out
before she rott. He sayeth he would send her for Syam; but I rather
take it to be for the Molucos, to cary provition. He tould me also that
a Portugez had wrot hym from Langasaque how the Viz Roy de Goa had byn
at Surat with a power of 7,000 men in many vessels, and had put all the
English to the sword and spoiled the place; and this news he said came
per way of Syam, and therfore I know it is a lye, having had letters
from thence so late, and not a word thereof.

The Capt. China tould me his brothers greate junck was arived from
Cochinchina at Langasaque.

Kitskin Dono's wyfe dyed this night past.

_July 14._--I delivered three hondred fyftie and eight _taies_ to Mr.
Nealson, viz., 350 _taies_ in bars and 10 Rs. of 8 is 8 _taies_. And he
paid out to Damian Maryn 670_ta._ 1_ma._ 0_co._ for 6 _cattis_ 4_ta._
2_mas_ wight amber greese, viz.,

                                                 _ta. ma. co._
  1175 sack wheate, at 3 _mas_ per sack, is       352  2   0
          And in plate bars                       317  9   0

                                                  670  1   0


Ther was reportes geven out that 2 shipps were seen ofe at sea neare
Langasaque, whereof Jno. Yooson advised Capt. Speck. Soe he sent out a
penisse to look out for them; but I esteem it to be common Japon news,
which most an end prove lyes. Yet the Duch expect a ship from Bantam or
Molucos, besides the bark _Jaccatra_ from Pattania and a junck.

_July 15._--I sent Oyen Dono 2 small barills wyne, 2 fyshes, and 30
peces drid tuny, not having visited hym since the king went from hence;
but he was not at home when it came, yet sowne after came to the
English howse to geve me thanks for it, and tould me of the favorable
axceptation the king of this place had fownd in all his affares with
the Emperour.

Also I was advised per a frend in secret how the Duch were coyning
falce Rs. of 8 at Langasaque, wishing me to take heede how I took any
of them. And that which maketh me to think it to be true is the tynne
they bought of me the other day. It seemeth to me a dangerous matter,
etc.

_July 16._--I gave a _tay_ in small plate to two pore sick women of my
owne money, the one a China woman, and the other a Japon. And ther was
8 pec. red zelas delivered and soald to Tonomon Sama and his men, at 1
_tay_ per pece--8 _tais_.

_July 17._--A cavelero of Umbra came and viseted me, geving me thankes
for the kindnesse shewed to his kinsman, Sugian Dono, and brought me
a Japan hargabus (or gun) for a present. He asked me many questions
about the longnes of our voyag, which I shewed hym in a globe. He also
enquired whether I knew Rome. I answerd I was never at Rome, yet I
shewed hym the place where it stood. I perceaved per his questioning
that he was a padre (or semenary prist) and thereupon gave hym a tast
that we had nothing to doe with the Pope, but esteemed hym only bushop
of Rome, haveing other bushops in England of as much authorety as he
tuching spiretuall matters; and that we esteemed not much whether he
were our frend or enemy, which we left to his choise.

Sent Capt. Speck 1 barell gunpolder out of junk, poz. 1 or 2 _cattis_,
duble barell and all.

_July 18._--I wrot 2 letters to Jorge Durois and Capt. Garrocho,
advising the Capt. I would take the amber greese, yf it were good,
or else retorne it back in saffetie; and to Jorge, to buy me 2 or 3
jarrs conservs and some candells. And ther was delivered unto Capt.
Adames 202 _cattis_ iron, for use of junk, of the ould iron out of
ston walles. Also I wrot a letter in Japons to a servant of Mr. Lucas
Antonison, a Japon at Langasaque, who I am enformed hath the duble of
my former letters and keeps them by hym.

And ther was 5 _taies_ in plate of bars lent unto Sugien Dono, the
kinges kinsman, to be repaid at pleasure.

_July 19._--I lent the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, viz., 2 bars gould
of 55 _tais_ per bar, is 110_ta._, 0_ma._, 0_co._, with 200 Rs. of 8 in
Spanish money, is 160_ta._, 0_ma._, 0_co._, to be repaid within 8 or 10
dayes, at his retorne from Goto, whether he is bownd to buy matters out
of 2 China junkes ther arived. This I doe in respeck I hope of trade
into China, which now I stand in more hope of then eaver. Also he had
a bale or _corge_ of duttis of 12 Rs. per _corge_, to make a triall to
sell them or more to the Chinas.

And Sugian Dono sent his man, desiring to borow 5 _tais_ in plate,
which on good consideration was lent to hym.

_July 20._--I paid 2 _mas_ to Torage, for making 2 _kerimons_,[89] for
Tuchma and Jno. Goblen, long ago.

Tonemon Donos man came to have borowed 20 _taies_ of me in his masters
name, but I had not a rag of money.

_July 21._--I receved a letter from Jno. de Lievana, dated le 29th of
July, new stile, in Langasaque, wherin he advised how Capt. Whaows
greate junck was arived from Cochinchina; and he which brought the
letter tould me that other 4 are com from that place in company with
her, wherof he saw one coming in as he came away. Soe the former report
of Whaows jonckes arival was an untruth.

I forgot to note downe how Jno. de Lievana advised that the report of
the Hollanders being in the Phillipinas is falce, and that Don Jno.
de Silva was gon to keepe the straites with a gale and a phriggat,
attending the coming of shipping from Agua Pulca.

_July 23._--Ther was flying reports that the Hollanders have driven the
Spaniards out of the Molucos and entred into the Phillipinas.

_July 24._--The China Capt. retorned this mornyng from Goto, and said
that all the Chinas goodes were put into warehowses, and not sufferd
to sell any thing till the king came, or else order from hym to geve
them leave. I receved back the two hundred Rs. of eight from the China
Capt.; but the two bars gould he left in pawne for a junck, to receve
them back and pay other money in place, etc.

Also the China Capt. gave me a peec of China lynen to mak breeches of,
etc.

And wee took eight peec. duttis of 8 R. per _corg_ to make a saile for
our bark. We entertayned a boateman this day at 18 _taies_ per ano,
named Sinzabra.

_July 25._--Mr. Wickham being sick, Mr. Nealson, Mr. Sayer, and my
selfe went to dyner to our frend Skeimon Dono, where we were well
entertayned. And from thence we went to Duch howse, where Capt. Speck
tould me he receved a letter from Albartus yisterday, wherein he
advised hym how Mr. Eaton arived at Miaco the first of this moneth,
and the second went to Sackay to look out for the bark he sent from
Edo with goods per sea, etc. He also tould me he expected news of 12
or 14 seale of their shipps to be in the Phillipinas this yeare, to
cut ofe their China trade for the Manillias, as also to look out for
the shipping from New Spaine (or Agua Pulca), and then to have 3 or 4
of them to com for Firando to lade provition. Their plot is great and,
yf it take effect, will utterly overthrow the Spanish and Portingalle
dissignes in these partes of the world, etc.

I bought 2 corse _catabras_ for Ingoti, cost 1 _mas_ 9 _condrins_ per
peec.; paid out per Jno. _jurebasso_, whoe put away his wife this day
for trix.

_July 26._--I sent a letter to Capt. Adames to Cochi with 3 iron
stampers, 2 mattocks, and a pickaxe, and a leg fresh pork and 5 loves
of bread.

Also the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, sent me a legg of pork and an
other of a goate, he feasting all the Chinas this day, and being ready
to goe for Langasaque. I sent per hym for his brother, in respeckt his
junck is retorned from Cochinchina, hoping to heare the truth of our
maters tuching the losse of our goods and people, as I gave hym in
charg at my being at Langasaque--I say I sent hym, _nifon catange_,
2 bottells of sallet oyle, and 100 peces drid _bonita_; and to Capt.
Andrea Dittis hym selfe 1 barill wyne, and 25 pec. drid _bonita_. And I
lent hym 80 Rs. of 8 at his request, he geveing me instance it was to
geve to certen frendes and parentes com per way of Cochinchina out of
China, and are to be emploid about our busynes in hand. The China Capt.
went for Langasaque in the after nowne.

_July 27._--I receved a letter from Gonrock Dono, dated in Langasaque
yisterday, wherin he wrot for stele and tynne for use of the Emperour.
And I sent a letter to Gonrock Dono, and sent hym 1 bar tyn for sample,
advising I had of the same som 190 _cattis_ more, and had soald it at
4 _mas_ per _catty_, and that this or what else was at the Emperours
servis.

Our hostis of Tomo came per this place, being bound for Langasaque;
and sent her sonne to me with a present of 2 barilles wine and other
_recado_,[90] _nifon catange_. Also Jno. Yosen arived from Langasaque,
and sent me a present of peares. And our new botswan of junck brought
me a present of dry fish and 2 small barills of wyne. Also I receved
an other letter from Jorge Durois with 20 musk millans. His 2 letters
dated the 2th and 5th day of August, new stile. He writes of much news
of a flett of 5 seale, to be arived at Manillia from New Spaine, with
men, money, and munition, against the Duch at the Molocos; but I think
it fabulose, as the rest of ther Goa forses to take and spoile Suratt.
Also it is reported that Fidaia Samme is escaped into Shashma or the
Liqueas; but I rest dowbtfull whether it be soe or no.

_July 28._--I delivered 8 R. of 8 and 1 pec. _fibuck_ to our
gouldsmith, to plate my rapier and dagger. And a cheefe man sent me
a present of a barill of wyne, 2 chickeing, and 5 musk millions, and
the like to Capt. Adames, in respeckt his servant is entertayned for a
marrener in our junck voyage.

_July 29._--This day Zenzebars wyves brother sent for Jno. Gorezano
our _jurebasso_ to com and speake with hym, and laid to his charge
that he had geven out bad speeches of hym that he had put men to death
without any reason (for yow must understand this fello is the hangman
or execuseoner of this place, an office of reputation in these partes
of the world). But our _jurebasso_ denied it that he spoake no such
matter; yet that wold not serve his turne; but I was glad to send Capt.
Adames to take up the matter. I know this came by meanes of the Duch,
or ther _jurebasso_, Symon, who I put away. These are trix.

_July 30._--I sent Capt. Speck a quarter of beefe. Much a dow had I
this day about clearing our _jurebasso_ Goreson, whome Zanzebar and
his wives rase thought to have destroyed, and, as I take it, at the
instigation of the Duch. For they sent me word, as I was at dyner,
that for my sake they had saved his life, yet would have hym to avoid
the towne within 5 or 6 dayes. I retorned them answer, I held them
for no justices nor judges, and that I had need of my _jurebassos_
service; but the felloe which came on the messadge was soe forward
in his speeches that he tould me, yf I sent him not away, that those
fellowes servantes would kill hym as he went in the street. Yow must
understand his adversaries are the hangmen or execusioners of the
towne. But I retorned answer that I was under the protection of Ogosho
Samme the Emperour, and had it under his ferme, that no justice in
Japan might meddell with me nor no servant in my howse, but per the
Emperours permition, and yet more larger then I spake it; and therefore
I warned them upon their heads, as they would answer it with their
whole generation, that they should not tuch hym till the king of this
place retorned. Which answer put them into such a quandare, that they
sent me word that, for my sake, they were content to pardon hym of all
matters and to be his frend. This word was sent me per Capt. Adames,
whome, before God and man, I must needs blame for taking part with
that vild fello Zanzabar, _alias_ Yasimon Dono, whom, per experience,
I have found to be an absolute cuning knave, and therupon have donne
all I can to make Capt. Wm. Adames to know it; yet he still esteemeth
hym more then all our English nation, and still he would pawne his lyfe
and soule for his honestie. And I cannot chuse but note it downe, that
both I my selfe and all the rest of our nation doe see that he (I meane
Mr. Wm. Adams) is much more frend to the Duch then to the Englishmen,
which are his owne contremen, God forgeve hym. I leave it to his owne
contience, and to God and the world, to be judges with what respect I
have used hym ever since we came into Japan.

An other matter is now set on foote, which I never did heare of till
this instant; and is, that we were cozened of 4 or 500 _taies_ (yf
not more) in the price we paid for our junck, and that it was parted
betwixt Zanzabar, our host Andrea at Langasaque, and other their
copsmates,[91] wherof Miguel our _jurebasso_ was one, and had 50
_taies_ for his share; but as yet I can fynd no witnese of the truth,
yet I verely beleeve it to be true, although Capt. Adams have no hand
in the matter. For with their smoath speeches they make a childe of
hym, and soe do what they list, and he will not beleeve any man that
will speake to the contrary. And thus much thought I good to note
downe, that it may be extant whether I live or dye.

Capt. Speck, Jno. Yoosen, and Mr. Matias came unlooked for to the
English howse to supper. Capt. Speck tould me he understood that Mr.
Eaton was on his way coming from Miaco. God send hym well.

_July 31._--Gonosco Dono, our guardians father in law, sent Mr. Wickham
and me 2 peare pigions. This Gonosco Dono is left cheefe _bongew_ or
Vizroy in abcence of the king and Nobasane.

_August 1._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned from Langasaque
and brought me a present from his brother, viz., 1 faire _kitesoll_,
2 spoutpots or ewers of tynn silverd, 2 pec. China lynen, and 1 peec.
silk lane; and he hym selfe sent a white _catabra_. He sayeth, tuching
our affares in Cochinchina, that the kyng denyeth that he never was
consenting to the death of our people, nether knew of it till it was
donne, it being donne per the Japons and not per his people; and that
for the money he owed us for the goods he bought of Mr. Peacock he was
willing to pay it, but non came to demand it; and for the rest of our
goods it was retorned back to our junck it cam in, etc.; and offred to
geve the China (our soliceter) his letter or passe for any mans safe
coming that I would send to receve it. But yow must understand Capt.
Speck sent a Japon about the lyke matter for the Hollanders, with a
present for the king, which he receaved. But this Japon lodged in
the howse of another Japon theefe, where they handled the matter soe
amongst them that the king retorned word of mouth to Capt. Speck that
he would not make them restetution of any thing, and, yf they sent any
more shiping, he would use them as he did the other. And those Japon
theeves, knowing how the king had promised restetution, went to hym and
perswaded hym to the contrary, telling hym that, yf he made restetution
to us, he must doe the lyke to the Hollanders. Soe that when the China,
our soliceter, went for the kinges letter, he denyed it hym. Thus the
second tyme were we crost per the Hollanders.

And I thought good to note downe that the China Capt., Andrea Dittis,
came and tould me how his brother Whaw at Langasaque desired to have it
under my hand writing tuching procuring trade into China. For, as he
sayeth, they have laid out 3,000 _taies_ allready to make way, and make
reconying it will cost them 5,000 _taies_ more, is all 8,000 _taies_
(I say eight thousand _taies_); which, yf in case they procure us free
trade into China, we are to pay them the said eight thousand _taies_
back, with what else shall be thought fiting. But yf they do not
procure us free trade into China, the losse to stand upon them selves.

I forgot to note downe how Jorge Durois wrot me how a greate Holland
ship was cast away on the cost of Lucan in the Phillippinas, out of
the which the contrey people saved 5 greate peeces of ordinance, and
that most parte of the men were cast away in the ship, and those which
escaped per swyming were taken prisoners and sent to Manillia to Don
Juan de Silvas, whoe they say is ready with forcese to depart to reskew
them at the Molucas; but I can hardly beleeve it.

Also a frend of Capt. Adames tould hym that three daies past arived
an emptie junck at Langasaque, which came from Cagallon in the
Phillippinas, and is one of the Japan junckes which we thought was lost
with ours which Water Carwarden was in, and came out of Cochinchina 7
daies before our junck could be ready to departe, and was driven on
the cost of Cord (_sic_) per stormy wether, and put among the ilands
Liqueas, yet could not recover port in any of them; yet after recovered
the iland of Lucan and put into the roade of Cagallan, having first
lost their mastes and throwne all their goods overbord, being glad to
escape with life; and from thence are now retorned with the emptie
junck, but know nothing of what is becom of ours.

Also this day we put away Fachman, our scullion, and Mr. Nealson paid
hym to cleare his accompt.

And I sent Capt. Adames to Cochi, viz.,

                          _ma. con._
  110 straw bags, cost      2   8
  50 poles, cost            1   5

                            4   3


Also I sent hym 3 loves of bread, and wrot hym the news of that junk
which was reported to hym came from Cagallion is untrew, for it is
a junk belo[ng]ing to the China Capt. brother, and came not from
Cochinchina last yeare; so that is a lye.

And we entertayned a new skullion named Sayemond at one _tay_ per month.

_August 2._--I gave Matinga 6 _taies_ small plate to buy rise; and I
had 14 onces black silk of China Capt., cost 2 _taies_ per _catty_.

I had much adowe with Zanzabars desemvery,[92] who sent me word 3 or 4
tymes they would break my _jurebassos_ boanes, yf he came to his owne
howse; but, as before, soe still I retorned them answer they should
take heed how they medled with any servant I had. And at night my
_jurebasso_ being desirous to goe to his howse, I gave hym leave; where
he found Jno. Devins entertaynment[93]; for Zanzabers wives brother,
with other consortes, set upon hym in the streete, and, had he not
by good fortune gotten into a howse, they had slayne him. And about
midnight, being garded per a gentlemans servant, my frend came home
againe, shaking every joint of hym.

_August 3._--The China Capt. being ready to goe for Goto, I lent hym
our boate and wastclothes, and delivered hym back 120 Rs. of 8, which
was the rest of the 200 Rs. 8 lent hym before and retorned, the other
being delivered hym after at his going to Langasaque, viz., 80 Rs.
of 8. Also I paid hym 38 _mas_ in Rs. of 8 for 1 _cattie_ silk at 20
_mas_, and 3 peces red China taffetie at 18 _mas_, is 4¾ Rs. 8.

And tuching the force used against my _jurebasso_ the other night, I
thought good, with the advice of the rest, to make it knowne unto the
cheefe justice in the kinges abcence, Mr. Wickham accompanying me.
They all tould me I had greate reason in what I did, and that they
would take order that this _bongew_ should not offer my _jurebasso_
any wronge; the which I certefied Capt. Adames of in good termes by a
letter sent hym to Cochi, where I heard he la sick. But he retorned
me a very harsh answer, as all the rest of our cuntremen can witnesse
which saw it. He shewed hym selfe a fermer frend to Zanzaber and his
consortes then to me and the rest of his contremen.

Also Capt. Speck sent for Mr. Wickham to com and speak with hym, and
complained much of my _jurebasso_, that he had a bad tonge and had
geven out vild reports of hym and his nation. I retorned hym answer, I
never heard hym use any such speeches, and, yf he thought me hys frend,
he might think I could not endure neather hym nor any other use such
speeches, without geveing him notis therof and chastesing the speakers,
yf they were my servants. In fine, his desire was to have me to send
for these _bongewes_ and to make an end of these matters in frendship;
unto which I answerd that I knew not whether they would com or no, yf
I sent for them, yet, yf there were any meeting, I desired that Capt.
Adames might be present, and they should not find me out of reason.
And soe I advised Capt. Adames, allthough he burdened me I went about
to meyntayne a theefe against all reason, which all men may think that
heare hym say soe that no honest man would doe it.

And I had allmost forgot to note downe how I delivered a writing to
Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., under my hand and seale, witnessed
by Mr. Ric. Wickham, Mr. Wm. Nealson, and Mr. Ed. Sayer; wherin I
consorted with hym and Capt. Whaw, his brother, and a therd brother
which they have in China, that yf they procure us trade into China, to
repay them all such sums of money and money worth as they should lay
out in procuring thereof; but yf it tooke not effect, then the losse to
light upon them selves. And they are to turne an other writing to me,
to use their best endevour in doing therof only for Englishmen and no
nation else whatsoever. And soe the Lord God grant a good suckcesse to
our proceadings.

I wrot 2 letters to Jorge Durois and Damian Marin, and receved 1 from
Jno. de Lievano of the 11th of August, new stile, of complementos. But
I wrot Georg Durois to buy us a peare of milstones and som candells,
and send them per first [ship].

_August 4._--Capt. Adames sent me a more frendly letter then before. He
is two much affection towardes Zanzaber, and wholy led away by hym.

_August 5._--Thear is reportes geven out that the Portingal shipp is
arrived at Langasaque from Amacau, and presently after Capt. Speck wrot
me a letter that it is the same greate shipp which was there the last
yeare; but, as Jno. Yoosen hath advised hym, she is not soe well laden
as she was the yeare past, but, as it should seeme, cometh more to
fetch away the lagg they left heare the last yeare then for any thing
else.

_August 6._--I hearing the sea _bongew_ was gon up to the king, and
dowbting he might enforme untruthes against my _jurebasso_, was
determined to have written 2 letters, 1 to the king, and another to
Chumba Dono, my _jurebassos_ ould master, to desire them not to geve
eare to his enemies falce reportes; but, as I was about to have donne
it, Tackamon Dono sent unto me his cheefe man, be being accompanied
with Skidayen Dono and Nicolas Martin, his _jurebasso_. And his desire
was that, for his sake, I would geve over the pursute of this matter
against the sea _bongew_, for that, yf it were followed, of force the
said _bongew_ must cut his bellie, and then my _jurebasso_ must do the
lyke. Unto which his request I was content to agree, and afterward
went to geve hym thankes for the paynes he had taken in the matter,
he having promised me that non should be so hardy to meddell with my
_jurebasso_ hereafter, and that he would take the matter in hand to
make the accord betwixt hym and his wife.

And from Tacaman Donos, I went to the Duch howse, where, amongst other
matters, we fell into discourse about the _bongews_ proceedinges
against my _jurebasso_, he taking the _bongews_ part, and tould me he
had donne well yf he had cut hym in peeces the other [day], and then
their would have byn no more words therof afterward. But I made hym
answer that it might be he was deceaved in that, for that I would have
brought the matter in question, and it might be would have cost both
hym and others their lives, for that all the justice of Firando said
that the _bongew_ had donne that which he could not answer. Once I
fownd my selfe agreeved that he had me in soe small respect that he,
without geveing notis unto me, sent craftely for my _jurebasso_ out
of my howse, thinking to have put hym to death without any forme of
processe; and he replid and said that the _bongew_ was a souldier, and
stood upon his honer more than his lyfe, and card not to cut his belly
upon such an occation. I answered, I did not esteem this _bongew_ such
a personage that he needed to take pepper in the nose soe much as he
did.

I forgot to note downe how I carid a jarr of China beare and 5 stringes
drid fish to Tacamon Dono for a present.

This _bongew_ and Capt. Speck are all one, and I know this trowble
against my _jurebasso_ came, the beginning of it, from the Duch howse.

Capt. Speck came late to the English howse, and Sr. Matias with hym,
and desired my company to goe and see a peece of ordinance cast; which
I did, but marveled at their workmanship. For they carid the mettell in
ladells above 20 yardes from the place where the mould stood, and soe
put it in, ladelfull after ladell, and yet made as formall ordinance as
we doe in Christendom, both of brasse and iron. Capt. Speck tould me
nether workmanship nor stuffe did not stand hym in halfe the price it
cost them in Christendom.

Capt. Speck tould me he receaved a barks lading of copper this day from
Sackay, and that his barke departed from thence 3 daies after Mr. Eaton
was departed from thence. God send hym hither in saffety.

And we bought 22 bags rise of Zazabra Dono for 4 _gantes_ a _masse_,
and delivered 12 bagges of them to our ship carpenters upon accompt.
They beging to work upon our junk to morrow. God be their good speed,
etc.

_August 7._--Gonosco Dono came to the English howse, and amongst other
talk tould me that the King had sent hym word to burne all the tobaco,
and to suffer non to be drunk in his government, it being the Emperours
pleasure it should be so; and the like order geven thorowghout all
Japon. And that he, for to begyn, had burned 4 _piculls_ or C. wight
this day, and cost him 20 _taies pico_; and had geven orders to all
others to doe the like, and to pluck up all which was planted. It is
strange to see how these Japons, men, women, and children, are besotted
in drinking that herb; and not ten yeares since it was in use first.

_August 8._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned from Goto, for
that the _bongew_ would not let hym enter into that place, he haveing
staid 4 daies a weating, and so retorned. Also they of Goto staid 3
_somos_, or small junkes, theare of his, which were bound for Firando,
and would not let them passe, but send out boates to bring in by force
all such junks as passe within sight. And for shark oyle, ther was but
25 littill jarrs, all which was taken per Gonrock Dono and sent to
Langasaque for his proper use.

And he adviseth me that 4 juncks are arived at Langasaque from
Chanchew, which, with this ship from Amacau, will cause all matters to
be sould cheape.

The China Capt. of a junck at Goto sent me a peece white damaske,
present.

We had newes this day that the Portingales of Amacau have taken the
bark _Jaccatra_, and meane to set out 2 men of war every yeare to take
all English and Duch that trade from Syam, Bantam, and Pattania for
these partes.

But, within 2 howres after, the bark _Jaccatra_ arived on the cost of
Firando, and brought in a Portingall junck which came from Champa,
wherin both Chinas and Japons are marreners. She took her on this cost
3 daies past, at an iland called Sta. Clare. Her lading is black wood,
I think ebony. It is thought the Portingales will complaine to the
Emperour, because the Hollanders take them within his dominions.

_August 9._--Cushcron Dono lent us 50 _taies_ in great plate for a few
daies, which 50 _taies_ Mr. Nealson receaved to lay out in necessaris
for the juncke.

And about midnight past the other Holland shipp, called the _Ancusen_,
of som 300 tonns, arived in the roade (or harbor) of Cochi. And after
nowne both shipps came into the harbour of Firando. And I went abord of
them, and carid 2 barills wine, a hogg, 5 hense, and 10 loves bread to
the greate ship; 1 barell wyne and the lyke quantety of the rest to the
littell ship.

They tould me that the English shipp which is to com hither is called
the _Oziander_, and the masters name Jno. Hunt; and that she would
be ready to com after them within 4 or 5 daies, but have brought no
letters for us, which maketh us to marvill. And I must needs condem Mr.
Denton and them at Pattania of sloth, or else the Duch of legerdemeane.

They report a parliament in England,[94] and that it is lyke we shall
have wars with Spaine; and that the Lady Elizabeth hath a yong sonne
per the Palsgrove of the Ryne.[95]

Also they say that Capt. David Midelton was generall of an other fleete
to Bantam, and, understanding of his brothers death, retorned to
England.

Oyen Dono sent me a present of 15 hense.

_August 10._--I sent out our penisse with 16 men to roe, and the Capt.
China, Andrea Dittis, in her, with an English flag and wastclothes
and a letter, to lye ofe and on 8 or 10 dayes, to put a pilot abord
our shipp yf she com on the cost. He had a bar plate, poz. 4 _taies_
5 _condrin_, and 1 _tay_ in small plate, to lay out in provition for
rowers, and a barrill of wyne, etc.

_August 11._--Our neighbour of Faccatay sent me 2 hennse; and Tonsho
Samma sent to envite me and the rest of our nation to dyner, but I
exskewsed it till an other tyme. And Taccamon Dono sent his man to me
to tell me that he had donne what he could to make peace betwixt our
_jurebasso_ Gorreson and his wife, but that shee would not in any sort
retorne back unto hym, although she should suffer death; and that Bongo
Donos wife had taken her under his protextion, and said he should not
have her againe.

_August 12._--I sent Capt. Adames 3 hense and 6 loves bread, he having
written for charcole, lyme, and oyle for the junk, but could not be
sent per meanes of the rayne.

Also I receved 2 letters from Langasaque from Jno. de Lievana and Jorge
Durois, of the 19th and 20th currant, new stile, wherein they write me
much news, viz., that Don Jno. de Silva hath a fleet of 15 gallions, 8
or 9 gallies, with many friggates and China _somas_, to transport an
army of 3,000 souldiers to the Molucos against the Duch; and that 3
gallions came from Aguapulca to the Manillias with halfe a million of
plate for the setting forward of those affares against the Hollanders;
and that a new Viz Roy was sent to Goa, called Don Jeronimo de Torres,
and knight of the order of St. Yago, and is likewaies ordayned governor
of the Phillipinas, and carrieth 200 substantiall Spaniards with hym to
Goa, amongst whome 1 is apointed for visitor, being well assisted with
other Spaniardes, a thing never seen in the Portingall Indies before;
and that no matter may passe but per his permission; and that he hath
sent away Don Diego de Basconçelos, the former Viz Roy, in cheanes
for Portingale till he be out of sight of land, and confiscat all his
goodes, which vallued above 200,000 rialles of 8, because he denied to
send succors the last yeare to Don Jno. de Silva to have gon against
the Hollanders at Molucos, for which it is thought he will loose his
head, yf he live to com into Portingale.

Many other matters they write me, as of the duble mariadg betwixt the
princese of France and Spaine; and that the King of Spaine hath marid
the Duke of Savoies daughter;[96] and that the said Duk was generall in
an armado per sea aginst the Turke, where the Christians tooke 150 of
the Turks gallis; and that the King of France hath made 12 new gallions
and sent them to the sucker of his father in law, the King of Spaine,
with such forcese, that they and the Archduke have taken 20 seale of
Holland shipps which were prepared to goe for the East Indies, and also
have taken 3 citties or townes from the Hollanders; but I esteeme this
a fable, for this Holland ship now com for Firando came out of Holland
but 14 moneths past.

Many other matters they wrot of, which is overlong to set downe,
namely, that the Kinge of Spain was sending an embassador to the
Emperour of Japon with a greate present, in respect of his favour to
Christians. So it seemeth he did littell know how he hath formerly
banished all Christians out of his dominions: I meane all fryres,
monkes, jesuists, and pristes.

_August 13._--I sent Mr. Nealson with our _jurebassos_ to Taccamon
Dono, to desire his Lordship that Goresonas wife might be forthcoming
at the kinges retorne to Firando, to answer to what her husband would
aleadg against her, for that her proceadinges were a dishonor both to
hym and me; which he retorned me word was true, and that yf she had byn
a man, as she was a woman, he would have taken an other course then
that he had donne, for that in some sort women have more privelege then
men.

And sowne after, Taccaman Donos man wrot a letter to Gorisan to com
and speake with hym, which he did, and was per his masters order, whoe
tould Goresano that he had better considered of the matter, and that,
yf he would, he would make his wife retorne againe to hym, whether she
would or no; or else, yf I would, he would cause her nose to be cut ofe
and banish her out of the cuntrey. This new change is per reason that,
yf this matter of his wife be brought in question before the king, the
other of the sea _bongew_ must be the lyke, which would be nothing to
the lyking of Zanzabar and his rase, etc.

And after nowne the capten and masters of the 2 Duch shipps came to the
English howse and brought me a present of 2 baricas of Spanish wine, 3
Hollands cheeses, 2 small potts of butter, and a bundell of stockfish.

And about midnight Mr. Eaton arived at Firando from Miaco, and, as he
tells me, hath lent 100 bars of gould to the King of Firando, to be
paid againe at 3 months; which is such a greefe unto me in respect of
the presant use we have of money, that I know not what to doe. I did
littell think Mr. Eaton would have served me so, I haveing written
hym expresly to the contrary. Mr. Eaton sayeth the common report is
that Fidaia Samme is yet living, with 5 or 6 other principall men, and
thought to be in Shashma.

Mr. Eaton brought me 5 letters as followeth, viz., 1 from King of
Firando, with 2 _catabras_, from Miaco; 1 from Ushenusque Dono, our
_bongew_, from Miaco; 1 from our host of Osekey, Yasozama Amanoia
Dono; 1 from Gilbert Cunings wife, from Edo; 1 from Andrea, Capt.
Adams brother in law, from Edo. Mr. Eaton tills me how this Andrea and
Mickmoy, our host, dealed Judasly with hym at Edo.

_August 14._--Sugian Dono sent me a present of new rise, _nifon
catange_.

_August 15._--I receaved of Mr. Wm. Eaton, for goodes sould for my
owne accompt in Japan, plate barse, fyve hundred threescore and nyne
_taies_, one _mas_, and five _condrines_; and in plate barse, for acco.
of the Wo^{ll} Company, one thousand two hundred and fiftie _taies_;
and in Priaman gould, po. ten _taies_, I say ten _taies_ wight Priaman
gould, and is the rest of a greater som delivered unto hym at his going
up to Osekey heretofore. And I gave hym a peece ashculler grogren of my
owne, cost me 11½ _tais_, as also a paire of blew stockinges, cost me 3
_taies_. Jno. Yossen retorned from Langasaque, and sent me a present of
grapes.

And I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames, of the knavery of Miguel, our
_jurebasso_, how Judas like he dealt with Mr. Eaton at Edo, and since
his coming still abcentes hym selfe night and day, thinking I will
beare with his fooleries as well as Mr. Eaton did, which he did of
meare necessitie, not knowing how to mend hym selfe. Yet I am in no
such need, but meane to put away the knave for his knavery.

And I receaved a letter from Capt. Garrocho, dated in Langasaque, le
22th of this month, new stile, wher inclosed came an other for the
China Capt. Alsoe he wrote me to buy a case of bottells, a lookinglas,
and 2 Holland cheeses for hym, etc.

There was geven to the owner and master of the boate which brought
downe Mr. Eaton two peces of white _baftas_ of 10 R. per _corge_, in
regard of the paines they tooke in bringing hym downe, etc.

And I sent a barell of wine and a bundell of paper to Gonosque Dono,
and the lyke to Taccamon Dono, per Mr. Eaton newly returned from
Miaco; which they tooke in good parte. And in the after nowne Semi
Dono retorned from above, and sent his man to advise me therof (_nifon
catange_). Soe I went to viset hym, in company of Mr. Wickham and Mr.
Eaton, and carid him 2 barilles of _morofack_ and 51 peces of drid
bonita. Also I sent a barill of wyne and millions to Jno. Yoosen, per
Mr. Eaton, in respect he holpe hym at Edo, his _jurebasso_ playing
the knave, viz., Miguel. He took it in good part, and envited me to
breakfast the next morning with [hym]. Jno. Yoosens brother envited
hym abord the greate shipp, and had 7 peces ordinance shot afe at his
retorne ashore.

_August 16._--Mr. Eaton and I went to diner to Jno. Yoosen, where we
met Capt. Speck, Sr. Mattias, and the masters and capt. of the ships,
with Jno. Yoosens brother. And at our retorne we found Mr. Wickham and
Mr. Nealson a littell intostecated, but Ed. Sayer stark drunk; and he
and Mr. Nealson fell together per the eares with daggers drowne in very
wild sort, and Mr. Wickhams tong ran at large.

And Bongo Donos wife in his abcense sent me a present of millans.

And Jno. Goreson our _jurebasso_ brought his wife to the English howse,
where we made them good frends. And Lues Martin came to Firando.

_August 17._--A Spaniard called Albaro Monues brought me a letter from
Capt. Garrocho, with 14 onces of amber grees, which he wrot me cost hym
95 _taies_ the _catty_, and esteemed it worth 110 _taies_ the _catty_.
But I retorned it back by the same bringer, as not being worth the
price he wrot me it cost.

And I receved a jarr of conserves from George Durois, with 25 peares,
which the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, took per way.

I was advised to send to Andrea, our host at Langasaque, to buy 5 or
600 _gantes_ of shark oyle at the price of 100 _taies_ the C., as he
advised Capt. Adames he could have as much as we stood in need of. This
I meane to doe to try conclutions, to see whether wordes and deeds are
alyke.

_August 18._--I went to Cochi to vizet Capt. Adames and see our junck
work. Went forward and carid hym a bottell Spanish wyne, 2 hens, 1 duk,
a pece pork, 8 loves bread and 6 millans, and returned to Firando to
dyner, haveing invited Albaro Monues, whoe tould me the Duch mariners
used hym ill yisterday in wordes, calling hym Cornudo, he being a marid
man. Wherupon grew som quarrell, for which 4 or 5 Duch mariners were
duckt at yard arme and each one 40 strips at capstayn.

Also the China Capt. retorned in our bark, the wind being still
contrary, and, haveing given order along the cost to send our pilotes
yf our ship came in sight, he went to Langasaque and staid halfe a
day, and bringeth word that his brother tould hym that the common
report amongst both Spaniards and Portingals was that now they took the
English to be their enimis, as well as the Hollanders, and therfore
would take all our shipps which traded into these partes of the world,
etc. But I remember the ould proverb, that "God sends a curst cow short
hornes".

I find on a sudden that Mr. Wickham grows very sullen humorous and, as
I am informed, geveth out that he is not the Companies servant, but at
will, and therfore will rather seek out for his retorne for England in
some shiping from Langasaque to Syam or Pattania. I think the reason
is that he hath fingerd 5 or 6 _cattis_ of good amber grees in the
Liqueas, and thinketh to make an India voyag for hym selfe, and to
retorne Capt. or Generall for the Company at his pleasure. Once truly
I, and I think all the rest of the English in these parts, desyre
rather his rowme then company. He is turbulent.

_August 19._--Taccamon Dono sent me a present of 8 hense. And I wrot
a letter to Capt. Adames how the China Capt.'s brother had lent us
325 _gantes_ of shark oyle, and therefore wished hym to send a man
to Andrea, our host, to buy 4 or 500 _gantes_ oyle at 10 _tais_ per
hundred _gantes_, as he enformed us their was enough to be had, to
the entent we may pay what we owe and have to serve our turne. And I
delivered fyftie _taies_ plate bars to Mr. Nealson to lay out about
charg of junck.

And Mr. Nealson paid Yaiemon Dono, our junk carpenter, forty 8 _taies_
in plate of bars, and is in full payment for 170 plankes for the junck
at 4 _mas_ per peece; the rest, being 20 _taies_, was paid per hym
before.

_August 20._--I receved a letter from Capt. Adames from Cochi, dated
this day, how a bark with Spaniards from Langasaque put into that roade
and came from Mallia[97] in shiping. The[y] say Don Lues de Fashardo
did fight with 20 seale of Hollanders bound for the East Indies, and
hath sunk or taken 12 of them, and the rest escaped by flight. Also
the[y] say the King of Spaine hath wars with the Turk, and that this
news is come from Madrid in 6 months per way of New Spaine.

And, after all, the Spaniardes came to the English howse, viz., Miguel
de Salinas, Capten Medina, and a Jerman called Marcus, with Alferis
Tuerto and Lues Martin, and Albaro Monues accompanied them. They used
many complementos and tould me of Don Lues Fachardos discomforting
the Holand flete going for the East Indies, but after such a divers
sort that I can scarce beleeve it to be true; as also that 4 sayle of
English shipps were passed the Straites of Magilanus into the South Sea.

Capt. Speck sent for 10 bars tynne, poiz. 9 _cattis_ 4 _tay_ wight.

_August 21._--I sent Capt. Adames a barill of _singe_,[98] 3 hense,
and 6 loves of bread, with peares. And I wrot a letter to Andrea, our
host at Langasaque, and sent it per a man called Miguel, an offecer of
our junck apointed per Capt. Adames; and sent per hym one hundred and
fiftie _taies_ in plate of bars, to pay for such hempe, sayles, and
canes, as Andrea had bought for junck before, and 800 _gantos_ of oyle.
Also I wrot to Jorge Durois how I had receved the milstones, a jar of
conserve, and 25 peares, without letter; and desired hym to buy me an
other jar conserve of sitrons or lemons.

And at night the Spaniardes envited them selves to our _fro_,[99] whom
I entertayned in the best sort I could. Also Semidono had envited hym
selfe to our _fro_ before, but after sent me word he could not com,
being sick of the sullens, because I would not lend hym money, being
well experienced of his payment before.

_August 22._--Semidone being necessitous and in cheefe office in the
kinges abcense, and now demanding but 20 _taies_, I have, with generall
consent, lent hym 20 _taies_, to be repaid at a month, as apeareth per
his bill. And I delivered 50 _taies_, I say fiftie _taies_, to Mr.
Nealson, to lay out in charges of junck; the 20 _taies_ to Semidone
being paid per Mr. Nelson.

Semidone came to our _fro_, accompanyed with Gonosque Dono and divers
other caveleros, whome (as I think) I entertayned to content.

And Capt. Adames came from Cochi in a greate rage against my
_jurebasso_, Jno. Goresano, saying he was the occation the carpenters
went not to work upon our junck. But this I know was an untruth, and
the master carpenter and Zanzabers knavery. And Capt. Adames scrivano
or purcer of our junk retorned from Miaco. And towardes night Capt.
Adames fell into an extreame fever, with vomiting, and could not make
water, soe he went to Zanzabars to take phisick. God send him his
health.

_August 23._--Our scrivano of the junck tells me that Ogosho Samme
sues to the Dyrio[100] to have the name of Quambaco,[101] which, as
it should seeme, is as the names of Ceaser or Augustus amongst the
Emperours of Rome, which is held an honor to all suckceadors. But he
denied it till he know Fidaia Same is dead.

_August 24._--We bought 17 _cacas_, or square postes, at 1 _mas_ per
peece, and 30 rownd postes, 2 for a _mas_, to send to Cochi, to make
skaffolds to repare our junck.

I wrot an other letter to Capt. Speck, in Spanish, touching the
retornyng of my slave Tome, he not haveing yet answerd my former,
and sent this per Capt. Adames. But his agew took him againe, soe he
delivered it not this day.

And there came a greate man of Crates to see our English howse, whome I
entertayned in good sort.

_August 25._--I delivered one hundred rialles of eight to Mr. Nealson
to employ in stuffs with Duch marenars, whoe, as it should seeme, have
mett with som prize per way, otherwaies they could not afford to sell
soe good cheape.

Also this night past a sentenell was slayne in this towne, and thought
Taccamon Donos men dyd it, yet no certentie.

And I delivered or paid to Mr. Wickham in plate of bars, paid per Mr.
Nealson upon acco., his yearly wages or sallary, twentie _taies_.

Capt. Speck retorned my boy Tome hom, yet wrot me a pricking letter, to
which I answered as apereth per coppie.

Sugen Donos father sent a present of peares, and envited hym selfe to
our _fro_ a day or tow hence. The China Capt. Andrea Dittis gave me a
peece of Canton damask for the peece of Cochinchina silke I gave hym
before. And the Japan feast of All Soles being com, the China Capt.
afforsaid sent me a peece of Lankin damask for a present.

Mr. Nealson paid a smith for making 2 _piculls_ neals for junck, 2
_tais_ 5 _mas_.

Also ther was a pink culler, no. 85, and a primrose, no. 125, with 6
other remnantes broad cloth, measurd, as apereth per perticulers in the
wast book; which broad cloth was retorned from Edo and Shrongo, and
brought back per Mr. Wm. Eaton.

_August 26._--I bought and paid for myselfe two javelen or speare
heads, cost 8 _mas_ and 8 _condrins_. And the China Capt., Andrea
Dittis, bouth two _tattames_[102] and a halfe broad cloth, viz.:--

  1¼ _tat._, cynamond culler, no. 125, at 12_ta. tatt._,

                                                         _ta. ma. con._
                                                  amontes 15   0    0

  1¼ _tat._, sad bleu, no. 98, at 12_ta. tatt._           15   0    0

Migell _jurebassos_ wife brought me a present of 3 hense, 20 egges,
and pearse.

_August 27._--This day at night all the streetes were hanged with
lantarns, and the pagons vizeted all ther _futtaquis_[103] and places
of buriall with lantarns and lampes, inviting their dead frendes to com
and eate with them, and so remeaned till midnight; and then each one
retorned to ther howses, having left rise, wine, and other viands at
the graves for dead men to banquet of in their abcense, and in their
howse made the lyke banquet, leving parte on an altor for their dead
frendes and kindred. This feast lasteth 3 daies; but to morrow is the
solomest fast day.

_August 28._--Our ould _jurebasso_, Jno. Japon, groing in to
poverty per his folly and lewd expences, came this day seeking new
entertaynment; but we had no need of hym.

_August 29._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames how his scrivano tould me
our carpenters said they would not work a stroake on the junk, except
I gave them a bill of my hand to pay them as they were paid the last
yeare; which I think is a trampo[104] of the Duch to get our carpenters
from us to serve their owne turnes, they now pretending to set out
their rotten junk for to carry provition to the Molocas. So I willed
Capt. Adames to content them with bill or what else, so our busynes
may goe forward; and with all advised hym that two Englishmen might be
spared to assist hym in looking to those Japons, we lying 4 or 5 of
us idell heare, for that the Worll. Company would condem us for lying
idell and to suffer strangers to look to ther busynes.

And I receved a letter from Capt. Garrocho, of the 2th Sept., new
stile, wherin he advised me of the recept of former matters sent, and
to buy hym a jar Spanish wyne. Also I receved an other letter from
Alvaro Monos, with a present of 10 water millons, 10 wreathes of bread,
and a basket of grapes, with offers of much frendship.

I understand that the Hollanders have offred Damian Marines to goe
master in their junk for the Molucos; but I know not whether he will
accept of it or no. But they have emploid hym to provid biskit for them.

And about midnight I had news that an English shipp was on this cost,
and that 2 daies past she was som 20 Japan leagues from Goto, where 5
Japans were left abord to pilot her for Firando. So, hereupon, I sent
out our pinis with Mr. Wm. Eaton in her, the Capt. China accompanying
hym, to meet them, and sent them 2 barills wyne, 50 loves bread, 2
hoggs, 12 hense, 2 duckes, 10 water millans, and a baskit of pearse;
and wrot a letter to Capt. Adames of the newse.

_August 30._--I sent our _jurebasso_ to advise Semi Dono, Taccamon
Dono, Oyen Dono, and Gonosque Dono, of the newes our ship was without
the harbour neare Goto; of which it seemed they were glad, and sowne
after sent their men to congratulate or rejoyce with me.

And I receved a letter from Jorge Durois, dated in Langasaque, 7th of
September, new stile, with a jar of conserve of citrones, bought and
cost 5 _taies_; also an other jarr conserve which he sent me for a
present, and 70 candells which cost one _taies_. And the man I sent to
buy oyle retorned from Langasaque, and brought but 241 _gantes_ oyle,
which cost 12½ _mas_ per ten _gantes_; but could get no more at prise,
and so retorned the rest money back. Yet Jorge Durois writes me a
Portingal hath a good quantety to sell. So I must now send this foole
back againe with the money.

Also I receved a letter from the _bongew_ of Goto, wherin he advised
me of our ships being neare unto Goto, and that he had put 3 or 4 men
in to her to pilot her to Firando. And towardes night Capt. Adames
wrot me a letter from Cochi how they had discovered the shipp to be
within 4 leagues, and that he imagined she would be at Cochi this
tide.

And I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois in answer of his rec. this day,
willing hym to buy me 700 _gantes_ of oyle.

_August 31._--I caused store of boates to goe out to tow in our shipp,
and wrote a letter to the capt. per Mr. Ed. Sayer, dowbting Mr. Eaton
hath missed of them. But sowne after our bote retorned and the Capt.
China in her with a letter from Mr. Eaton, how the ship was at an ancor
3 or 4 leagues from Firando, and that the shipps name was called the
_Hoziander_, the capt. or Cape merchantes name, Mr. Raphe Copingall.
So I retorned forthwith per the the said bark and went abord, where I
receved these letters following, viz.:--

  1 generall coppy of a letter from Worshipfull Company.
  1 coppy of theirs in perticuler to Capt. Jurdain, Bantam.
  1 from Capt. Jourden in Bantam, 15th Aprill, 1615.
  1 from Mr. Westbie in Bantam, 10th ditto.
  1 from Jno. Beamond in Bantam, ditto 10th.
  1 from Harnando Ximenes in Bantam, le 9th ditto.
  1 from Mr. Adam Denton in Pattania, le 5th July.
  1 from Generall Saris at Souldania, 1st June, 1614.
  1 from Sr. Thomas Smith in London, 30th November, 1613.
  1 from Sr. Thomas Smith in London, 26th Aprill, 1614.
  1 from my brother Walter Cocks in London, 6th Aprill, 1614.

And Mr. Raphe Copendall came ashore with an other yong man called Jno.
Osterwick; but the wind was soe extreame that all the barks were forced
to retorne and leave the shipp riding at ancor.

It apeareth per the Worshipfull Companys letters that all the voyages
now are put into one generall company in adventure. God be praised for
it. And as Capt. Copendall tells me, their is an other company made to
adventure 120,000 _l._ str. per ano. for 4 yeares ensuing, but to what
places not openly knowne; and that a seale great English shipps weare
entred into the straites of Magelanus, but for what entent not knowne.

_September 1._--I rec. a letter from Chubio Dono, wherin he wrot me
much cumplimento, and sent an other as from the Emperour to Capt.
Adams, that he should forth with com up to the Emperour. What the
reason should be I know not; yet I suspect it was a plot laid before
by Capt. Adames hym selfe and the Duch, to the entent he might goe up
to serve their turnes; and truly I esteem he loveth them much better
then us that are of his owne nation; or else it may be that he seeketh
occation to get the Emperour to comand hym to stay and not to procead
forward on the Syam voyag, his tyme of service to the Company being out
within 2 months. Once the end will shew what is the occation. But Capt.
Adames hym selfe esteemeth it is to enquire of hym about a fortresse
newly built at the Liqueas, unto which place it was thought Fidaia
Samme would retire after his losse of Osekey.

Capt. Speck came to English howse, being ready to go up to Miaco.

_September 2._--I got barks to goe out to tow our shipp into harbor, yf
it were possible, much fearing a tuffon; and Capt. Copendall and Mr.
Eaton went aboard to hasten matters forward and, yf the shipp came not
in, to bring aland our Cambaia cloth and other comodetis, to the entent
to lay out the present for the Emperor, and make as much hast as we
can, not to be overlong behinde the Hollanders. But the wind proving
so hard, we could nether get ship into harbor nor bring goods ashore,
Capt. Copendall and Mr. Eaton remeanyng all night abord. God send us
wether to bring her in this dangerous tyme of the yeare.

We looked out for a bark to goe up in to the Emperour, but could find
non but ould rotten ons, all being above with the king but one which
the Hollanders had gotten before we asked. So we sent to Sanguro Dono,
Foins sonne, som 4 or 5 leagues hence, to borrowe a bark of his.

_September 3._--I got barkes to goe out againe to tow ship into
harbour, yf it remeaned calme, or else to bring good ashore; but the
wind was so stiffe all day that they could doe nothing.

And I wrot a letter to Mr. Jno. Hunt to send his carpenter to tell
what plank and tymber he needed to sheath and repare the _Hoziander_;
and withall sent hym a pig, 6 hense, 10 loves of bread, with peares,
redish, cowcombers, and bell engenios.

And I wrot a letter and sent a present to the _bongew_ of Goto for
puting pilot abord and sending me word therof. So the present was,
viz.:--

  1 pec. of white baftas of nyne Rs. _corg._
  1 pec. blak bafta died, at 9 Rs. _corg._
  1 pec. duttis of 10 Rs. per _corg._
  1 pec. blue byram of 10 Rs. per _corg._
  1 pec. red zelas of 12 Rs. per _corg._

And the master of the bark which brought downe Mr. Eaton came from
Langasaque and brought me a present of pearse, and offerd to bring his
bark hither, yf I had need to fraight her. And about mid night Capt.
Adams went out in a bark abord the _Hozeander_ with many other barks
to tow her in, we fearing a tuffon. And Capt. Copendall brought 2 bras
vessells of quicksilver ashore out of the _Hozeander_.

_September 4._--About 9 a clock the _Hoziander_ came to an ancor in the
harbor of Firando, being towed in with boates, and shot ofe ii peces
ordinance; and the Duch answered them with two peeces out of the howse,
and 5 out of the greate ship. And Capt. Speck with other merchant came
abord her, he being ready to departe for Miaco: and he presently did,
and had 3 peces ordinance for a farewell, and we the lyke when we
retorned ashore. And they shot 3 peces more after out of the Duch howse.

And I made Tushma, my boy, a new _kerimon_ of damask of Canton, with a
cloake or gaberdyn of stript taffete. And Mr. Nealson paid 3 _taies_ to
Toma, the boy, and 3 _taies_ to Jno. Moure the boy, upon reconyng of
ther wages at 1 _tay_ per peece per month. And I delivered 50 _taies_,
I say 50 _taies_, plate bars to Mr. Nealson; and he paid 10 _taies_
lyke plate to pilottes that brought our ship the _Hozeander_ from Goto
to Firando. And we receaved ashore this day out of the _Hoziander_ 4
chistes guns or fowling peces, also two fardelles stile, containing 166
gads,[105] with 4 fardles cloth Choromandell.

_September 5._--We set carpenters a work to make chistes to carry up
our goods, and laborers to make mat sackes to put our peper in.

Also the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned from Langasaque and
brought me a present of a blew peece of damask from his brother Capt.
Whaw, and gave me an other hym selfe with an embrawdred velvet cushin.
And Jorge Durois sent me 2 hampers containing 5 peces wroght black
velvet, 9 peces black taffeties, and 24 peces sattens, wroght and
plane, as also three pere silk stockings, and 1 peare thrid as per
adviz. And Ushenusque Dono, our ould _bongew_, sent me a present of
frute, and came hym selfe and viseted me, offring his service to goe up
in our bark as before, if need weare.

Also we had newse the king of this place was within 13 leagues and
would be heare to morrow. Yet I was secretly enformed by a frend that
he is in towne, secretly com in, and ment to retorne out to his barks
to morrow, and so to enter at pleasure. Soe we gave order to our ship
to sute offe her ordenance as he past by, being determend to goe out to
meete hym. It is said that the King of Shashma is lykwais retorned to
his contrey per the Emperours permition; soe it is thought som exploit
is in hand.

Also the China Capt. tells me that Damian Marin and Jno. de Lievana are
taken prisoners and carid abord the greate shipp, and is in despite of
the service they did to the English.

Capt. Speck departed towardes Miaco, and had 2 vollers small shot out
of the _Jaccatra_ and 5 peces ordinance out of their greate ship, and
charged againe and gave 3.

_September 6._--We laded most part of our goodes abord a bark, to goe
for Miaco, Capt. Copingdell going up with Capt. Adames and Mr. Wickham.
The perticulers goodes appeare per invoiz.

And som 2 howrs before day littell Antony the _bongew_ came and advized
me how the king was arived, and was glad our English shipp was in
saffety in the port, and desired that yf we shot offe any ordinance,
that it might be doone when he was landed or had sett foote ashore.

The botswen, the guner, and the carpenter misused the master, offring
to have let malefactors out of prison which were punished per the
master.

_September 7._--Very early in the mornyng the king entred into Firando,
and the Duch shot ofe 3 small peces ordinance as he passed by, out
of the howse, and 20 peces ordinance out of the greate ship, and 6
out of the small, with 2 volle of small shot out of each ship. And
our shipp, the _Hozeander_, shot affe 11 peces ordinance. And sowne
after I sent our _jurebasso_ to Oyen Sono, to desyre hym to exskews me
towardes the king, for that I came not to kisse his handes in respect
I thought he was awery of his voyage per sea. He said he would adviz
the king thereof, and that I had reason in not coming, for that he was
overweryed.

I delivered 50 _taies_ to Mr. Nealson, and one hundred and fiftie
to Mr. Wickham in part of his cargezon, and 50 _taies_ to Capten
Copendall. And Mr. Wickham had a peece fine black taffete, cost me
29 _mas_. And Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., brought back a bar of
Oban gould, sent his brother before to geve to a god child, but now
retorned, and poz. fyftie and five _taies_.

And Tono Samme, the king, sent for me to com and speake with hym; which
I did, accompanid with Capt. Copendall. He tould me that Shongo Samme
was gon for Edo before he came away, and that he thought the ould
Emperour was gone for Shrongo before this tyme. Soe he offerd me his
letters of favour to Codskin Dono and Safian Dono, because (as he said)
the Spaniardes and Portingals were rejected and not suffred to com in
the Emperours presence, nether would he vouchsafe to receve any present
they sent hym. Also he said that he thought this junck which the
Hollanders had taken was good prise, because they had not the Emperours
passe; and therefore he would not meddell in the matter.

I could not forget to note downe how Mr. Hunt, the master of the
_Hozeander_, fell out with Roland Thomas, the purcer. Soe they went
together by the eares. I condeme them both very much; but surely they
were drunk, espetially the master, and I think he is crazed in his
witts.

I wrot a letter to Gon Rock Dono, how the Portingals had taken
Damian Marin and Jno. de Lievana prisoners abord there great ship at
Langasaque, desiring restetution of them, or else I would complaine to
the Emperour.

_September 8._--I delivered 50 _taies_ plate bars to Mr. Eaton, and is
parte of money sent in cargezon, Mr. Wickham having 150 _tais_ before.
And I delivered the invoiz or cargezon of goodes sent up into the
custody of Mr. Ric. Wickham and Mr. Wm. Eaton, to accompany Capt. Raphe
Copendall, to goe up to the Emperour with a present and other goodes
to sell, Mr. Wm. Adames accompanying them; Mr. Wickham and Miguell
_jurebasso_ to goe for Edo, and Mr. Eaton and Tome to remeane at Miaco
or Osekey. And I would not want to note downe that we had much a dow
this day about the masters faling out with the purcer, all the shipps
company being against the purcer; the master aledging he followed hym
and sett upon hym unawares at advantage, and took two gould ringes from
hym, and threw hym downe a hill, and thowght to have stobd hym with
his owne knife, haveing taken it from hym per force. Out of dowbt this
Roland Thomas is an idell braned foolish fellow.

I paid per Co Juan 5 _mas_ for a hat I gave formerly to Sangero Samma,
ould Foynes sonne, few daies past. And I receved two hundred Rialles of
eight back from Mr. Wickham of money delivered hym in Syam voyage, so
that 100 Rs. remeanes yet in his handes.

I wrot a letter to Gonrock Dono about the taking prisoners of Damian
Marin and Jno. de Lievano, desiring hym to procure their liberty, for
that they belong to our junck, and therefore have nothing to doe nether
with Spaniard nor Portingall, whom I hould noe justices in Japon.

_September 9._--I wrot two letters to Jorge Durois and Capt. Garrocho,
in answer of theirs of the 7th and 12th September, as also advising
them I would geve knowledg to the Emperour how the Portingalles had
taken Damian Marin and Jno. de Lievana prisoners, they being our
servantes, and I had advised the lyke to Gonrock Dono per letter
yisterday. These 2 letters I sent per conveance of Capt. China. Also I
delivered one hundred _taies_ plate bars to Mr. Nealson, to lay out for
the needfull.

The king sent 2 barelles _morofack_, 6 bundells drid cuttell fish,
and a hogg, for a present to Capt. Copendall before he went up. And
Semidone sent to me for a bottell of Spanish wyne, which I sent hym
out of that littell the Hollanders gave me. And Capt. Copendall had 2
pottes of sweet meates of ginger, citrons, and oringes, etc.

_September 10._--Semidone sent for som sweet meates, haveing invited
the king. Soe I sent hym of 3 severall sortes. Thus these noble men use
to doe in these partes.

Capt. Copindall had with hym up 2 sivell (_sic_) spownes, 2 silver
forkes, and 1 silver salt and cover of Companis, with 2 littell silver
boles lyke halfe grapes of my owne.

Capt. Adames now came and tould me how we want above 1,000 _cattis_
of ould net to calk our junk with all. Out of dowbt his skrivano is a
false knave; yet I may not say soe to Capt. Adames, for then all the
fatt would be in the fire.

And ther was 2 baggs peper sould to Skidayn Dono, to pay as rest is
sould, poz. 131 _cattis_ nett.

I wrot two letters to Jno. de Lievana, 1 per a Japon, and the other
enclosed to Gonrock Dono, both to one effect, that I will use the best
meanes I can to procure their libertis, I meane Damian Marins and his,
or else will mak it known to the Emperour.

_September 11._--Capt. Copendall, Capt. Adames, and Mr. Wickham, and
Mr. Eaton departed from Firando this mornyng towards Miaco; and ther
was 11 peces ordinance shot affe for a farewell. But, as we were at
dyner, ther came a letter to me from Capten Copendall, wherin he wrot
me that Capt. Adames was gon before and would not stay for them, and
that their bark was so pestred that it was ready to sinck. Whereupon
he wrot me to send them an other bark to lighten them, which I did
with all expedition; and per Mr. Rowland Thomas, the bringer of this
letter, I sent hym, viz., 2 cases bottells of his owne with Spanish
wyne, 2 barrelles _morefack_, 40 loves bread, 1 great _kitesoll_, 1
bras candellstick. And I wrot an other letter to Capt. Copendall per
the bark, advising how I understood Migell _jurebasso_ had in speeches
misused a man of Gonrock Donos, whome went passenger in the bark.

Also I sent my Turkish History per the bearer of this letter to Capt.
Cop., to passe away the tyme per the way.

_September 12._--We landed yisternight and this day all the cables and
cordage of _Hoziander_ in our yord under a shed. And wee receved peper
ashore yisterday in 4 boates, and this day 218 bagges peper in cloth
sacks made.

Also Soyemon Dono sent a present of 2 pewter cups and 10 Japon
_sequanseques_ (or dishes), looking for greater matters, which needes
must be retorned to hym and others which are in place.

And towards night our carpenters that wrought upon the junck came to
Firando from Cochi, to-morrow being a festivall day, as also to receave
more rise. I find Gingro, Capt. Adames scrivano, left to look to our
workmen, to be but an eypleasing prowd knave. They thought to have
pickt a quarrell to fall out, yet I gave them content.

_September 13._--Yaimon Dono, the master ship carpenter, brought me a
present of pears, and, in the end of many complementall speeches, took
exceptions that land carpenters were sett to work abord our shipp. I
answerd hym, he and others were occation thereof, in using me out of
reason heretofore and making me to pay them what they list, etc.

And we carid Tome Samme, the King of Firando, a present as followeth,
viz.:--

   1 pec. black wrought velvet, cost           020 0 0
   3 pec. grogren.
  10 pec. whit baftas, at 20 Rs. _corge_       008 0 0
  10 pec. red zelas of 12 Rs. _corg._          004 8 0
  10 pec. blew byrams of 15 Rs. _corg._        006 0 0
  10 pec. chint Amad of 20 Rs. _corg._         008 0 0
  10 pec. cours tapis of 04¾ Rs. _corg._       001 9 0
  10 pec. chader pintado of 09 Rs. _corge_     003 6 0
   4 cakes wax
   5 bags peper
   2 sows lead
   1 damaskt gun
   1 chast gun
  10 knyves

_September 14._--The King of Firando compassed in most parte of the
harbor with nettes and hedges to ketch fish to morrow; and sent me word
to com and drink with hym to night, which I exskewsed till to morrow
mornyng.

And towardes night Mr. Jno. Huntt, the master of the _Hoziander_, came
and tould me that 2 of the shipps company had byn abcent 2 daies, viz.,
one Doughtie, a quarter master, and an other called Wadden, a rich mans
sonne of Plymouth, whome is fownd to be a very cheater. And at very
instant I had notis of Doughtie, where he was drunken in a howse; soe I
took hym and sent hym abord with a letter to the master, etc.

The master sent me word that one Piter Waddon was ashore and had byn
the lyke 2 daies and nightes together, and that he had stolne and pawnd
his companions aparell, and laid it to pawne in whorehowses, and was
gon upon the score in divers howses, and determened to run away to som
other place. So I laid out to look for hym.

_September 15._--The walle or neting the king caused to be made to fish
was borne downe in the night with the force of the tide, etc.

I went betyme in the mornyng to vizet the king, accompanid with Mr. Ed.
Sayer, Mr. Jno. Osterwick, and Mr. Jones the chirurgion. He entertayned
us kindly; and so we retorned.

Also we sent 18 _piculles cattis_ net abord the junk at Cochi, with
iron and sacks charcoll. And there was bought of Andrea, the China
Capt., and his brother Whaw foure _cattis_ musk, being in 86 codds,
cost twelve _taies_ per _catty_ in China; and so let us have it to pay
in Rialles of eight 60 R.

And I bought and paid for 4 peare lether pomps, and 3 peare velvett
pantables[106] two _taies_ to a China shewmaker.

And in the after nowne the king and all his nobles came a fishing
before our dore, haveing laid duble nettes fist cres[107] over the
haven at a hie water. I made ready 2 pigs, 2 ducks, 2 hense, and a
loyne pork, all rosted, with a banket sweetmeates, enviting them
ashore, but fownd them unwilling; and soe carid it abord the kinges
boate, where they did eate what they pleased. And soe they departed
along by our shipp, where they had 7 peces ordinance shot affe at their
landinge.

And, in my abcense, a fello came with a letter from Jorge Durois and a
peare silk stocking (as he said); but standing gaping at the fishermen,
a knave stole both stockinges and letter from hym, or else, as som
craftie knaves doe, did rob hymselfe, etc.

_September 16._--I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois of loosinge his letter
and stockinges. And I gave my peare knives to the China Capt. to send
to his brother (or rather kinsman) in China, upon hope trade; as also
he had 4 looking glasses for same purpose, bought of Duch, and 4 pec.
chowters[108] of 20 Rs. per _corg._, with knyves; and it is thought
fit to geve 50 Rs. 8 to the man which carrieth the letter, to pay his
charges per way, and to send a greate gould ring of myne with a white
amatist in it, cost me 5 ll. str. in France. This ring to be sent to
one of these 2 men, named Ticham Shofno, an euenuke. God grant all may
com to good effect. Amen. Amen. Also 2 ivery son dialles, cumpas lyke,
delivered hym.

_September 17._--We carrid a present to Genshe Samme, the kinges
brother, as followeth, viz.:--

                                _ta._
  1 damaskt peece, cost          05  0  0
  5 pec. white baftas, cost      04  0  0
  5 pec. chint, cost             04  0  0
  1 peec. wrought satten.

I thought to have carid presentes to Takkaman Dono and Semi Dono, but
they were gon out of the towne to their lands to meete the king in
his progresse, he now going to vizet his cheefe placesse, being his
grandfather dying, he is soly com to governe, and had noe tyme to doe
it till now by meanes of Japan warse. I must of necessety please this
Takkamon Dono and Semi Dono, because I expect to procure 2 _chawnes_
(or howses) to build gadongs upon neare our English howse.

And I went to Oyen Dono, the kings secretary or governor, and carid hym
a present of--

  1 pec. rich wrought taaffety.
  5 pec. white baftas of 20 Rs., cost           4  0  0
  5 pec. chint Amad of 20 Rs. _corg._, cost     4  0  0
  5 knives.

He tould me he would assist us in getting these _chawnes_, althought
it displaced men that paid daylie tribute to the king, it being in the
hart of the towne, and therefore gave me counsell to get Taccamon Dono
and Semi Dono to frendes; but hereafter, when our busynes was well
setled, then not to geve giftes to any one but to the kinge. This was
his counsell, etc. He also adviced me to envite the king to dyner at
his retorne back, for that yet he was not invited since we came into
Japan.

Their came a Portingall prisoner to the English howse, in company
of Hollanders, haveing lycense to walk abroad. He was taken per the
Hollanders in this junk, and is the 5th tyme they have taken hym at sea.

_September 18._--Jno. Gorezan, our _jurebasso_, fell out with Andrea
Dittis, the China Capt. This _jurebasso_ hath a fowle tong and falleth
out with all men, and the China Capt. was overmuch hasty, etc.

_September 19._--Sugian Dono came and brought me a present of 2 baggs
sweet powlder to lay amongst aparell, and said they were geven hym per
the kinge and formerly geven to the king per the Emperour.

_September 21._--Ther was sould and delivered to Tome Dono, our next
neighbour, 1 logg leade, delivered to hym, containing 225 _catts_, to
pay as rest are sould. The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, went for Goto
this mornyng, to meete Capt. Whaw his brother, to send away a small
soma for China about our pretended and hopefull procuring trade into
China, which God, of his mercy, grant may take effect, etc.

_September 22._--We receved 18 sows lead ashore at English howse,
containing 4,250 _cattis_ Japan wight.

And ther was 3 presentes sent as followeth, viz.:--

To Soyemon Dono. the Kinges receaver,

                                            _ta._
  1 pec. satten, cost                         6 0 0
  3 peec. white baftas, cost of 20 Rs.
  5 knyves.

And to littell Ontony, _alis_ Sifian Dono,

  5 pec. white baftas of 20 Rs. _corg._
  5 knyves.

And to Sugean Dono 1 damaskt peec. (or gun).

And we receaved 18 sows leade more ashore, which way 4,115 _cattis_.

_September 23._--We receaved 64 sows lead more ashore, which is the
rest of 120 sows sent per _Hoziander_, which 64 sows poiz 14,649
_catts_, whereof 1 sow of 202 _cattis_ was retorned back for ships
provition.

And I went to Cochi to see how our junck work went forward, being
accompanid with Mr. Huntt, whoe lyked reasonably well of their work,
only thought them laysie, as all men else doe. But it is the cuntry
fation, etc. We carid 2 barills wyne, with 2½ _mas_ in fish, and 10
loves of bread.

And I receaved a letter from Gonrock Dono, dated in Langasaque 9 dais
past, wherein he answerd me tuching myne sent about Damian, that he was
in prison for misdemenor, the capt. of the Portingall shipp haveing
taken hym as a man nothing apertenyng to me nor our English nation.

Nobesane retorned this day from Miaco and sent me word thereof, and
that the Emperour was gon for Edo before he came from Miaco; for which
I am sory, for that Capt. Coppendalls jorney will be longe.

_September 24._--I wrot a letter Capt. Adames to make knowne to the
Emperour how the Portingalls have taken Damian Marin and Jno. de
Lievana prisoners; or, in his abcense, Mr. Richard Wickham, to procure
in all he may to geve the Emperour or the King of Edo notis thereof.
This letter is directed to Mr. Wm. Eaton at Osekay or Miaco, in abcense
of Capt. Adames, to send after hym, first having taken coppie thereof.
Also I sent 2 other letters to Gonrock Dono and Martin de Guinia, capt.
more of the Amacau ship.

_September 25._--We receaved all rest wax ashore, but not wayd. I sent
another letter to Damian, enclosed to his host, with an other to his
host in Japon, in answer of his.

Yosque our butlers wife was brought to bed of a boy.

We sent a present to Bungo Dono, as followeth:--

  5 pec. white baftas of 11 Rs. per _corg._
  5 pec. chint Amad of 15 Rs. per _corg._
  1 damaskt gun or peec.

Magdalina Marias daughter paid me two _taies_ I lent her a yeare past,
and I gave it to Matinga.

And ther was geven in present to Genemon Dono, the Admerall, 5 pec.
baftas, and 5 knyvs.

We receaved aland at English howse 100 2 inche planck of Skidayon Dono;
and we brought the _Hoziander_ to a key (or wharfe), and put all her
ordinance ashore, to bring her aground to trym or sheath to morrow
mornyng, God willing. And within night littell Antony, _allis_ Sifian
Dono, sent me worde the king was retorned to Firando.

_September 26._--I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois, to have a reconyng of
velvettes, sattens, and other matters, as of Jorge the Caffro and the
100 _tais_ retorned I lent hym.

And Semidone sent me a hanch of venison. I went and viseted Semidone
and Tackamon Dono, and carid eache of them a present as followeth,
viz.: 1 chast peec., 5 pec. white baftas, 5 pec. chint.

And I receaved a letter from Jorge Durois, dated in Langasaque, 1th of
October, new stile, wherin he advised me how the Spaniardes had taken
Damian Marin and Jno. de Lievana prisoners, saying they were bownd to
serve the King of Spaine, and that they gave it out they would take hym
prisoner because he was frend to us and the Hollanders.

We unladed all the _Hozeanders_ ordinance ashore, and brought her
agrownd before the English howse to sheath her.

And Sayemon Dono sent me word that one of the kinges men was now
com from Miaco, and mett Capt. Adames and our people at Osekey, and
that the Emperour was departed towardes Shronge 2 daies before they
arived. But mens words are so divers that I know not what to beleeve,
espetially because I receave noe letter. I receaved a complementall
letter from our hostis at Tomo.

_September 27._--I invited the King of Firando and his nobles to
dyner to the English howse on Munday next; but he sent me word it
might better be on Sonday, for that he expected the King of Crates
one Munday. And I sent a boate expres to Langasaque to buy things
necessary, and sent 12 _taies_ plate per hym which went, and wrot Jorge
Durois to assist hym, and to send me 2 jars or pottes conserve. And
sent 2 Hollandes chises to Jorge and Bartolemew de la Rocha. Also I
sent to procure the kinges letter to Gonrock Dono about the setting
free of Damian and Juan, which he granted me, and sent it away per one
of his owne servantes to Langasaque, as he promised me he would.

_September 28._--The 2 carpenters and on master carpenter, the master
mate, fell sick, and were brought ashore to the English howse.

And, finding the king had not sent his letter to Gonrok Dono yisterday
(as he promised me), I sent Ed. Sayer with it expres, and agreed with a
boate and 7 men for the voyag for 6 _ta._ 4 _ma._ And sent a present to
Gonrok Dono:--

                                              _ta. ma. co._
  2 damaskt fowling pec., cost 10 _ta._        10   0   0
  5 pec. white baftas of 20 Rs. _corg._, is    04   0   0
  5 pec. tapis Suras of
  5 pec. chint Amad of 15 Rs. _corg._          03   0   0
  5 pec. blew byrams of 15 Rs. _corg._, is     03   0   0
  5 pec. red zelas of 12 Rs. _corg._, is       02   4   0
  5 pec. buckshaws

This present is sent to hym as cheefe _bongew_ of all goodes brought
into Firando, Langasaque, or any of these partes of Japon.

The Duch envited the King of Firando abord their ship, and gave hym 3
pec. ordinance for a wellcom at entrance and 5 or 6 for healthes and 15
out of both shipps at his going ashore. And a Duch marener, in charging
a peece that was honycombd, had his hand shott offe and his face all
batterd. Soe our chirurgion was sent for to assist the Duch chirurgion
to save the man, yf it were possible.

_September 29._--I receaved 4 letters, viz., 1 from Capt. Raphe
Coppendall, 1 from Capt. Wm. Adames, 1 from Mr. Richard Wickham, 1 from
Mr. Wm. Eaton, all dated in Ushmando, 40 leags short of Osekay, the
19th of this present month of September, where they were wetherbound,
yet heard of the Duch or Hollanders arivall theare 4 daies before the
date thereof, and that as then the Emperour was at Miaco, and thought
would stay till the end of this month. Also Mr. Eaton wrot that they
had news of Mr. Jno. Gurneis death at Syam with one Jno. Dench, and
that Mr. Lucas Antonison was gon for Pattania or Bantam, and Mr.
Shipard left cheefe at Syam. This was tould to our trumpeter by a Japon
that is com from Syam, who served in the English howse at Syam.

Taccamon Dono sent me word that I might buy the China womans howse and
make a gedong in the place at my pleasure.

_September 30._--We sent a present to Sangero Samme that lent us a bark
to carry our goodes to Osekey:--

                                   _ta. ma. co._
  1 damaskt fowling peece, cost     5   0   0
  1 pec. alleia[109] of 30 Rs. is   1   2   0
  2 pec. tapis Suras

_October 1._--Taccamon Dono sent me a dish of fresh fish, 1 of fresh
water. The kinges smiths house was set on fyre this night by the
neglegence of his servantes, but sowne quenched. Yet his dores were
shutt up by order from the king, because they looked no better to
matters; it being stricktly looked unto, and they banished or put to
death that have their howses burned.

In the after nowne the boate I sent to Langasaque, to buy provitions to
envite the king to dyner, retorned and brought that she went for, with
2 jarrs conserves from Jorge, brought for me. And Susanna, his wife,
sent me a box of conserves, with a baskit of peares and an other of
figges, and a small box of conservs for China Capts. doughter, which I
sent unto her. Jorge letter was dated in Langasaque le 9th of October,
new stile, in which he advised me that Damian Marin and Jno. de Lievana
were taken prisoners per meanes of Capt. Gorrocho, which truly I doe
beleeve.

_October 2._--Thomas Davis, the carpenter, died this mornyng at break
of day of the small-pox, he being choaked with them.

I envited the king with his 2 brothers and Nobesane, Semedone,
Sangrasame, Taccaman Dono, Sugean Dono, and 5 other cavelleros to beare
them company at the kinges choise. They dyned after the Japan manner,
and supped after the English. And, as he was at supper, word came that
the King of Crates was arived; which made hym to make short, and soe
went to meet hym at landing. Soe the great Holland shipp shot afe 3
peces ordinance as he passed by, and the littell shipp 3 other at his
landing. Soe after he sent me word of his arivall, and envited hym
selfe to our _fro_ to morrow in the afternowne.

I understood Peter Wadden went 3 tymes over the walle in the night; soe
I turned hym abord againe. He is a graseles fello and unlykly to amend.

_October 3._--The King of Firando sent me a buck, knowing the King
of Crates cam to supper, and gave me many thankes for his kind
entertaynment yisterday. And after nowne the King of Crates came
according as he said, being accompanid with the King of Firando and 3
other noble men of Crates. Unto whom I gave the best entertaynment I
could and to their owne contentes. And after, they went abord the great
Holland shipp, and at retorne ashore had 6 peces ordinance shot out of
her and 3 peeces out of the littell shipp.

And towardes night 2 Hollander mariners which had comited som falt were
laid out for having byn abcent 2 or 3 daies from shipp; and 1 of them
came to the English howse, desiring me on his knees to get his pardon.
Soe I wrot a word to the capt., and sent our chirurgion along with hym.
And they were no sooner gon but others brought the other Duchman, and
he desird the lyke favor of me; but, whiles I was writing the letter,
he gave them that kept hym the slip and soe escaped for the tyme.

The King of Crates gave me a present of 2 _langanacks_[110] and a
_cattan_, and desird to see the experience of a fyry arrow shot out of
a slurbo[111] and a burnyng pike; which is referd till his retorne from
a province of his which he is now bownd to vizet.

_October 4._--The King of Crates departed from Firando this mornyng,
and the great Holland ship shot afe 3 peeces of ordinance as he passed
by them.

And I receaved a letter from Ed. Sayer, dated in Langasaque, le 30th
of Septembr, how he had delivered the present to Gonrock Dono with the
letters, and that he willed hym to stay 2 daies, and he would use his
endevor for us in what he could. And I wrot 2 letters to Jorge Durois
and Capt. Garocho.

And upon councell of frendes, haveing remeander of things bought for
inviting the 2 kinges, I invited to dyner to morow 9 cavaleros, viz.,
Gonosco Dono, Unagense Dono, Matasabra Dono, Oyen Dono, Toresamon
Dono, Soyemon Dono, Shosque Dono, Otonagen Dono, Sifian Dono. I had
thought to have envited Ushenusque Dono, our _bongew_, and the kinges
secretary, but they were out of towne.

_October 5._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned to Firando
from Goto, and brought me back a gould ring, delivered hym the 17th
September last, to have byn sent for a present to an euenuke in China,
valued as it cost 5 l. str.; but, upon better consideration, not
haveing two ringes, and 2 principall men emploied about the affares,
they thought it best to buy 4 _cattans_ or Japan sables, and to send 2
to eache one. Also the China Capt. gave me a musk cod for a present,
and was sent from a China unknown unto me. And he doth assure me on his
life that our pretence to gett trade into China cannot chuse but com to
good effect; which God grant.

The cavaleros envited to dyner came, being 8 in number, as apeareth
on the other side. And as they were at it, Bongo Sammes adopted sonne
(which is the kinges youngest brother) came by, and they called hym in,
and after departed all content.

Gonosquo Dono brought a present of 10 bundells Japan paper.

_October 6._--We bought our next neighbors _chowne_, or howse place,
to the northwardes, to pay 40 _tais_ for it, and she to carry away
the howse, but geve it out we pay but 25 taies for it, she being far
in debt and therfore the money seazed upon. The other 15 _taies_ she
hath secretly, to mentayn her and her children. Also Mr. Nealson
paid the scrivano of the junk 60 _taies_ 4 _mas_ plate bars, for
to pay carpenters and mareners; and sent 150 bags lyme to Cochi.
And I delivered 40 R. 8 to China Capt. to buy, or rather garnish, 4
_cattans_, to send into China. Allso I delivered hym 4 _mas_ wight
Priaman gould for same purpose.

And I delivered one hundred _taies_ plate bars to Mr. Nealson. Also Mr.
Nealson paid sixteen _taies_ plate to China Capt., viz., 12 _taies_ in
bars for blads, and 4 _taies_ in small plate of workmanshipp.

_October 7._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, came and tould me that
the capt. moure[112] of the shipp of Amacon and other Spaniardes and
Portingales had hired 2 barkes for 100 _taies_, to com from Langasaque
to Firando, to use meanes to steale away a Portingall which is capt.
of the junk the Hollanders took; and that ther was divers Spaniardes
and Portingalls armed secretly in the said barkes, which matter was
revealed by 3 Chinas which fled out of the said junk to Langasaque and
made report hereof to other Chinas, 1 of whome wrot therof to the China
Capt. So I went to the Duch howse and made it knowne to the Hollanders,
whoe gave me harty thankes for it.

And I wrot a letter to our host at Tushma, per a merchant of that
place, desyring to heare from hym of sale of our pepper, which I
understand was soald long since; and that upon his advise I would send
more, desyring hym to bring or send the money for this per first sure
conveance.

_October 8._--This day, before nowne, our 3 barks we sent to Osekay
with Capt. Copendall and his company retorned, from whome I receaved
a letter, dated in Osekay the 23th ultimo, with an other of same date
from Mr. Eaton, wherin they adviz me the Emperour was departed from
Miaco 8 daies before their arivall, and that Capt. Adames went post
after hym, being geven to understand that he ment to stay in a place at
halfe way, hoping by this meanes to dispach busynes theare, and so to
retorne; the Duch haveing dispached theirs before he went from Miaco.
And they thought it fitt to retorne back all 3 barks, because they
knew not how long it wold be before they retorned. Also they both writ
me that pack no. 116 is wanting in the cargezon, with 5 bambows black
paynting and 5 small pec. wax.

Also our host of Sackay came to Firando and brought me a present of a
barrell of wyne, making much mone that all he had was burned when our
comodeties were burned, so that now he is new to enter into the world,
and to that entent meanes to goe purcer in a junk of Gonrock Donos for
Syam.

I sent our _jurebasso_ to thank Songero Samme and Sifian Dono for
the lent of their barks to carry up our men and merchandiez. Capt.
Copendall advized me he gave 2 _taies_ to the master of the greate
bark and 1 _tay_ to the purcer. And ther was geven away in presents as
followeth, viz.: To Gonosqo Dono, governor, 1 pec. black satten, cost
6_ta_; 3 pec. whit baftas of 8 R. corg; 5 knives. To Shosqo Dono, the
kings chamberlen, 1 pec. alleias of 15 R. per _corg_; 3 pec. baftas of
8 R. per _corge_, 3 pec tapis Suras. To Unagense Dono, capt. generall,
1 damask peec. To Skiamon Dono, provedore, 1 pec. alleias of 15 R.
per _corge_; 1 pec. white baftas of 8 R. per _corge_; 1 pec. duble
borall[113] of 7 Rs. per _corge_; 1 pec. tapis Suras. To kinge's cheefe
cooke, 1 pec. alleias of 15 Rs. per _corge_. To kinges under cookes, 1
pec. white bafta of 8 Rs. per _corge_. To kinges sumaker for cookry, 1
pec. white bafta of 8 R. per _corge_. To an another ould cooke, 1 peec.
white bafta of 8 Rs. per _corge_. To 5 neighbours maid servantes for
cookry, 3 duble peeces of burrall of 7 Rs. _corg_.

I receaved a letter from Ed. Sayer, dated 6 days past, wherin he wrote
me Gonrock Dono drivs hym of with delaies, and as yet hath not sett the
men at liberty, but rather that the Portingals have put Jno. de Lievana
in irons beloe in the shipp, as well as Damian, for that no man should
com to speake with them.

_October 9._--We searched our warehouse for pack no. 116, but canot
find it; and examening over packing bill and wast book, find that the
said pack with the wax and 5 bambows painting were all sent along in
the great bark of Sangero Samma; soe it must rest upon the master, the
purcer, and upon Jno. Pheby to answer for those matters.

Ed. Sayer retorned from Langasaque and brought answer from Gonrock Dono
that he had donne what possibly he could, but could not get the 2 men
set at liberty. So I went and tould the king thereof, and tould hym I
ment to send away a bark in all hast with letters to Capt. Adames to
adviz the Emperour thereof, desiring to have his Highnes letters of
favor of the matter, which he promised me. So I made ready the bark
and wrot my letters: a generall letter to Capt. Adames, Mr. Eaton, and
Mr. Wickham, as apeareth per copy, but antedated to morow; and also a
letter to Capt. Copendall, advizing of losse of pack no. 116 with wax
and paynting; and at any hand advised Capt. Adames to use all meanes
possible to set these two men at liberty.

Gonrock Dono sent me a present per his man of a peare _bubes_[114] and
2 chist _mach_,[115] containing in each chist 200 roles cotton _mach_.

_October 10._--As I was about to send away the bark and sent to the
king for his letters, he retorned me word that he had taken counsell
about the matter, and wished me once more to stay a littell and he
would send 1 of his owne men to Gonrock Dono, not dowbting but to
procure the men to be set at liberty. So, much against my will, I was
constrained to desist from my purpose.

I forgot to set downe how I receaved a letter from Martin de Guinia,
the capt. of Amacan shipp, with an other from Capt. Garocho, and a
therd from Jorge Durois, all dated le 15th present, new stile, and a
forth letter from Albaro Munos, of 17th ditto. And Jorge Durois sent
me 2 pear of silk stockinges, cost, as he said, 7 _taies_, with 100
candells at 7½ for a _mas_. Also I receaved a fifte letter from Melchar
van Sanfort, dated in Langasaque, le 12th currant, new stile, only of
commendacons; and he retorned me a Duch cronocle which I lent hym.
And ther was a bag of Pattania pepper sould to Gonrock Dono for the
Emperour, containing grose 160 _cattis_, is net 155 _cattis_, at 8
_tais_ per _picull_.

And about one a clock after midnight Tho. Heath, the carpenters mate of
ye _Hozeander_, dyed of a lingaring disease, which began with a blody
flux.

_October 11._--Our junck, the _Sea Adventure_, was lanched this day at
Cochi, and I got Mr. Hunt to goe see her yf the carpenters had donne
their partes, Ed. Sayer accompanyng hym. I sent the letters I wrot of
10th current to Mr. Eaton per a bark of Firando, and put 5 _mas_ port
on it, and in that letter 2 others for Capt. Copindall, 1 from Mr.
(_sic_) and an other from Mr. Osterwick, and a therd from my selfe,
dated as to morow, le 12th present, advising with all speed to send
them to Capt. Adames to speak to the Emperour to procure the liberty
of Damian and Jno. Also I sent an other letter to Mr. Eaton, to enquir
whether Twan is apointed to make warse against the Chinas, and to send
me word.

_October 12._--I forgot to note downe yisterday that, when the ships
company went to bury Thomas Heath in the place where they formerly had
buried his mate, Tho. Davies, they fownd that som villanouse people had
diged up the cooffin and stolne the winding sheete and his shert, and
lefte the karkasse naked upon the grownd--a villanouse acte. So they
soonke the other coffin into the sea.

The kinges eldest brother, Guenche Samme, _alius_ Tonoman Samme, had 20
_cattis_ wax, to pay as the rest is sould.

14 of the junks carpenters began to work upon the _Hozeander_ this
mornyng, counting the master for one, all ship carpenters.

I had much adow this day about a boy which Mr. John Osterwick had
entertayned, named Antony, whome (as it seemeth) is servant to a
Spaniard that sent a Japon into our howse, a mallapert knave, whoe,
without speaking a word unto me nor no man else, went up into Mr.
Osterwicks chamber and laid handes on the boy to have throwne hym out
of the howse per force; yet he went without hym. But sowne after the
King of Firando sent me word to deliver the boye into his handes, which
I did, he promising to send a man with hym that yf in case it be a
false bravado of the Spaniardes (as I aleadge it is) that then the boy
may be retorned back, etc.

Also the master, Jno. Hunt, and Mr. Osterwick, going to a lodg the king
had lent as, fownd a yong gerle of som 11 or 12 years of adge, dead on
the back side under the walle, and doggs feeding on her, havinge eaten
both her legges and her lower partes, with one hand, being newly kild
but a littell before. It is thought som villen had ravished her and
after kild her, or else, being a slave, her master had kild her upon
som displeasure and cast her out to be eaten of dogges, an ordenary
matter in these partes, the lives of all slaves being in the masters
handes, to kill them when he will, without controle of any justice.

_October 13._--This night past, about midnight, our small skiffe of
the _Hoziander_ was stolne away and, as the shipps company sayeth, per
a Hollander which ran away from the great shipp, being one of the two
I wrot in favour of heretofore, and that they saw hym upon our bridg
in the night about midnight; so out of dowbt I think they let hym goe
away with the boate, one knave helping or winking at an others escape.
For truly I neaver saw a more froward and bad leawd company then most
of them are, and the cheefe ringleader a master mate called Dorington.
So that, seeing contynewally their leawd courses in going abroad night
and day without leave, the offecers them selves being worst of all, we
were forsed to make orders and set them up at meane mast, sortinge the
company into therds, one whereof might take their pleasure per day,
retorning abord before sonne setting, and the other {~VULGAR FRACTION TWO THIRDS~} to look to shipps
busynes and that carpenters doe their labour. This Dorington hath said
in open company amongst them all that nether captain, master, nor no
other had authority to punish men with ducking nor whiping, geving it
out with othes that he and the rest would have victuels as they list,
without controle. Once he is a drunken, unruly, mutenouse fello, and
not fitt to serve the Wor^{ll} Company.

I sent word to the Duch howse how that fello had stolne away our
skiffe; as also I sent word of the lyke to Taccama Samme and the
admerall, whoe have sent to look out after hym.

The China Capt. brought me word that all Goto is burned, the kinges
howse as well as rest, not one howse left standing of some 300. It is
thought the Japans sett it on fyre of purpose to have the riffling
of the Chinas goods which came in 7 or 8 junks, but the fyre was so
vehement that littell or nothing was saved, 5 Chinas being burned that
adventured to save their goods.

And in the after nowne the kings man, which he sent to Langasaque about
the setting of Damian and Jno. at liberty, retorned with a sleevles
answer, they Portingales answering, as they did before, that they would
not deliver them upon noe tearmes. And on the way, as the kings man
retorned, som 7 leagues from Firando, he met the Duch man which had
stolne our skiffe, and so brought both hym and it back againe. Soe I
sent the Duchman to the Hollands howse, for which they gave me many
thanks.

I went to the king to certefy hym, or rather to know of hym, what
answer he had receavd from Gonrock Dono; which was as I said before.
Whereupon I desird his Highnesse to lett me have his letters of favour
to Safian Dono and to Gota Zazabra, testefying how these 2 men were
entertayned into the service of Englishmen to goe in our junck for
Syam; which letters the king granted me and sowne after sent them for
the English howse. And I wrot an other to Chubio Dono, in the Japan
tonge, to desire his assistance in this matter to the Emperour, to get
these 2 men sett free. So we hird a light bark which rowed with 4 ores
and a fellow to cary those letters, and paid 12 taies small plat for
the voyag, to deliver the letters to Mr. Wm. Eaton at Osekay, or Miaco;
in doing whereof they are to rowe night and day.

_October 14._--I sent away the kinges letters and wrot a generall
letter to Capt. Adames, Mr. Wickham, and Mr. Eaton, and sent it per
light horsman as before, advising at large, as I did in my former
letters 2 daies past. And I sent out 6 barkes to tow in our junck from
Cochi, which brought her into harbour at Firando about nowne.

I delivered back the writing I had of Capt. Whaw for 550 _pezos_
adventured to China the yeare past. I delivered it back to his brother
Andrea. And ther was five _piculles_ Bantam pepper sould to Tomo Dono,
to pay as we sell the rest.

Two Caffros of the King came from Langasaque and advised me that an
English gentleman was kept captive in cheanes abord the ship of Amacan,
and that they saw hym, he being a young man of 24 or 25 yeares of
adge. But I did enter into opinion that this might be som trap of the
Portingals and Spaniardes to make me to write to the Emperour upon such
a slight speech without other proofe, whereby to geve the Emperour
distast, ther being no such matter at all. Yet I have geven order to
frendes that may goe abord the said shipp, to look out whether ther be
any such matter or no.

_October 15._--In this burnyng of Goto the post, or man which carid the
kinges letters, lost all that he had, to the vallue of 700 _taies_,
being an ould man but well spoaken and therfore chosen to goe about
this busynes. Whereupon the China Capt. said unto me that out of his
owne he would send hym 50 _pezos_, is forty _taies_, and wished me to
ad 20 _pezos_ more to it, to make it up 70 _pezos_, and that he would
send it all to hym in my name, as a largesse in respeckt of his losse,
being sorry for it, promising greater matters, yf yt pleased God to
prosper hym in his proceadinges to get us trade into China.

And ther was sent 2 presentes to Whaw, the China Capt. brother, and an
other China of Langasaque called Leangu, I say Leangu, both which are
emploid about our busynes to procure trade into China, viz.:--

                                                  _ta. ma. co._
  6 pec. whit baftas, of 16 and 17 Rs. 8 _corg_    04   0   4
  6 pec. blew byrams, of 15 R. _corg_              03   6   0
  6 pec. red zelas, of 12 R. _corg_                02   8   8
  6 pec. tapis Suras.
  6 knyves, cost                                   00   3   3½

And Jno. Dono lent us his howse over way to put our junkes provition
in, till she be rigde. And I sent a letter per China Capt. to Jorge
Durois, how I had receaved the 2 peare silk stockinges, and kept the
case bottells for hym till he came. Also I gave order to the China
Capt. to look out for 3 China carpenters, to goe in our ship for
Bantam, as also to buy 150 grate bambooes for us, yf ther be any, and
to enquire whether the Portingals have an Englishman prisoner abord
their shipp or no. We brought all the tymbers and other matters ymploid
about the junk from Cochi to Firando, having hired Tome or Jno. Donos
howse to put them into.

_October 16._--The King of Crates retorned to Firando and sent to
desire to see a fyre arrow shot out of a slurbo, which was donne before
hym and the king of Firando to their greate content twise. He desird to
have the slurbo to take a sample by to make an other, with a receapt
how to make the compound for the fyre work. And about midnight departed
towards Crates; which saved the geveing a present of 2 damaskt fowling
peeces, yf he had staid till morninge.

Tansho Samme, the kinges kinsman, bought two pec. Cambaia cloth.

_October 17._--Before nowne Capt. Speck retorned from Miaco, and had 3
peces shot out of Duch howse and 6 out of greate shipp for a welcom. I
went to the Duch howse to vizet hym, and he tould me, yf he had wanted
but 2 howers tyme at his arival at Miaco, that the Emperor had byn gon
before he had com; and that he with his owne mouth tould hym that the
Portingall junck they had taken was good prize, both men and goods,
and all other they took hereafter to be the lyke, both of them and
Spaniardes, yf they had not his passe, but, having it, not to meddell
with them. He also delivered me 3 letters from Capt. Copendall, Mr.
Wickham and Mr. Eaton, dated in Miaco the 28 and 29th September, and
one from Mr. Eaton of 2th October, with 2 others from our host at
Osekay and Tome _jurebasso_. And Jorge Durois arived heare and tells
me that the capt. more of the Amacan shipp sayth that, yf Gonrok Dono
will, he is content to sett Damian and Jno. at liberty, for per his
permision he took them prisoners, and at his demand he will set them
free. But I answerd hym that I had his letter to shew the contrary.
Once the end will try all. I think there be legerdymeane. Jorge sent me
a present of a bottell Portingall wyne, 12 greate peares, and 2 boxes
craknells and littell tarts.

_October 18._--Symon _jurebasso_ brought me a letter from Mr. Eaton,
dated the 8th October, wherin he writes he hath opened all the packes
cloth Cambaia, and findes most of the baftes, viz. ¾ of them, spotted
and rotten, so that no man will looke on them. He offerd them all
together to our host for 6 _mas_ per peece, but he would not buy them,
answering he thought they would never be sould for anything. Also he
saieth their wantes 10 pec. chaddr pintado of them were put into the
cargezon.

_October 19._--Semidone sent me a letter how he met the King of Crates,
whoe willed hym to write to me to send hym these parcelles following,
and he would send money per they which brought them. Soe I delivered
them to Semidonos man.

                                                        _ta. ma. co._
  20 pec. white baftas, of 20 R. _corg_, at 1½ _tay_     30   0   0
  20 pec. tapis Suras, of R. per _corg_, for 1 _tay_ pe. 20   0   0
  05 pec. alleias, of 30 Rs. per _corg_, for 2 _tay_ pe. 10   0   0

                 Som totall amontes unto                 60   0   0


Skidian Dodo sent a beefe for a present; and Jorge Durois mad account
for these thinges following:--

                                            _ta. ma. co._
  4 jarrs conserves, at 5 _tais_ per jar, is 20  0   0
  2 milstones to grind malt or wheate        01  0   0
  70 tallow candells, cost                   01  0   0
                                            ---------- _ta. ma. co._
  This is for the house, and amont unto      22  0   0  22  0   0

  More, 1 pere silk stockinges for Capt.     04  0   0
    Cop., at
  More, 1 pere thrid stock., for hym, at     00  6   0
  More, 1 pere gren silk stockings, to Mr.   03  5   0
    Osterwick
  More, 2 pere silk stockinges, at 7 _tay_,
    for Capt. Copingdall or Mr. Osterwick    07  0   0

                                             15  01  0  15  01  0
  More due to hym per rest of velvettes and
    sattens com from Amacan, besids profitt             27  2   0

                    Som totall amontes unto             64  3   0


_October 20._--I wrot a letter to Albaro Muños in answer of his, and
another to Diego Farnando Rigote to geve 3 or 4 _gantos_ candy oyle to
Jorge Durois and sell the rest as he can. Taccamon Dono sent me a beefe
for a present and ther was a pece basta Deher, of 17 Rs. per _corg_,
sent to Jorge Durois wife, in respect of frute and sweetmeates she sent
to us at divers tymes which was spent in the howse.

_October 21._--This night past 2 of the Hollanders prisoners ran away
out of great shipp, viz. both Portingales, 1 being capt. of junk they
took, and the other a merchant whome they had taken 5 tymes before.

And Sticamon Dono sent me 2 duckes and a dish of peares for a present.
He is a comedian or a jester to geve delight to the King.

_October 22._--This night past both the Portingalls which escaped out
of the Holland shipp were taken and brought back per such as the King
of Firando sent out after them.

The servant of Gonrock Dono retorned back 4 pec. tapis Suras of 1 _tay_
peece--thus thise pedling fellows use us--and thinketh to stop the
other 2 _taies_.

Also Capt. Speck sent to buy our junk ould rother[116] with 2
great ores belonging to it, which prise was made of 110 _tais_ per
endifferent men on both partes.

_October 24._--Capt. Speck came and tould me the carpenters had begild
hym about his junk rother, they being good, so that he had no need of
ours at 110 _tais_, but retorned them back againe.

_October 25._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Speck to desyre hym to lett us
caryne our shipp against their small shipp called the _Jaccatra_, we
finding it impossible to trym her agrownd where she is, we not being
able to com to the keele of her without endangering the shipp.

The servant of Calsa Samme, the Emperours youngest sonne, came to the
English howse and bought for his master as followeth:--

                                                    _ta. ma. co._
  2 damaskt fowling peaces, at 15 _taies_ peec.      30  0   0
  2 peec. buralles                                   02  0   0
  1 pec. alleia Amad                                 02  0   0

And Nobesane sent us a beefe for a present.

Capt. Speck sent me a letter how they could not lend us the small ship
to caryn against, for that they must bringe her agrownd this spring to
trym her.

_October 26._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton, and advised of the
speeches ther is that Fidaia Samme is alive in Shashma, and much
provition of barks a making ready, and that it is said the Emperour
pretendeth to make warse against a great lorde in the north; wishing
them (I mean the English) to keepe this to them selves and look out in
tyme to prevent the worst, yf need be, and to send me downe the true
accompt of all matters of ould, to the end I may send a true ballance
to the Company in respect of our want, as also to avoid danger,
whatsoever may happen.

George Durois sent me a present of 2 pottes of mangeas and 20 great
peares from Langasaque, but noe letter came with them.

The King envited the Hollanders to dyner to day, and sent me word he
would have had the English but that he stayeth for the retorne of Capt.
Coppindall.

_October 27._--We set the mastes of our junck the _Sea Adventure_
this day; at the doing whereof were 3 or 400 men persons, all the
neighboures, or rather all the towne, sending their servantes, and came
themselves (them that were of accointance) and brought presents (_nifon
catange_), after Japon maner, of wyne and other eating comodety,
abord the junk, wishing a prosperouse voyag, all the offecers haveing
eache one a present of a littell _barso_ of wyne, and should have had
lykewaies each one a bar of plate advanced on their wagese, but I
referd that till the coming of Capt. Adames.

Sould unto the King of Fushemis servant 40 peeces white baftas of 20
Rs. per _corg_ for 14 _mas_ per peece--amontes unto som of 56 _ta._

The King sent me a buck for a present.

_October 28._--Goresanos wife brought her doughter of 20 daies ould
to the English howse, with a present of a _barsoe_ of wyne, figges,
and oringes, desiring a name to be given her, which was per consent
Elizabeth.

Calsa Samme tould me he had receaved letters from his master that the
Emperour was to retorne to Osekay, and his master with hym, to fortefie
the ruenated fortresse and put garrison into it; which is a signe that
warse are lyke to ensue. God grant all may fall out for the best.

_October 29._--We bought 15 hogges of Bongo Samme, cost all 8 _taies_
plate of barse.

_October 30._--The governor of an iland at Goto, he which sent the
pilot abord our shipp _Hoziander_, came this day to see our English
howse, and brought a present of a beefe and 10 hense. He is going to
the hott bathes in Issue[117] for dollor or greefe he hath in his
boanes.

The China Capt. tells me that this night past his brother sent hym a
post overland, to tell hym that Gonrock Dono hath staid a small _somo_,
or junk, at Langasaque, which they had thought to have sent to China
about our affares, but now is said to carry souldiers into an iland
neare unto China called Tacca Sanga;[118] but I rather think it will
prove the Liqueas, in which place it may be the Emperour doth think
that Fidaia Samme lyeth lurking.

I wrot 2 letters to Langasaque, viz. 1 to Jor. Durois to send sample of
pitch, as also making mention of present of mangeas and peares sent;
1 to Melchar van Sanfort with musters of 4 sortes of spikes or neales
to be made at Langasaque, viz. 1000 great spikes, 1000 lesser, 1500
lesser, 2000 smallest.

_October 31._--In respect the servant of Calsa Samme may doe us good
above hereafter, as per words he offers lardgly, I gave hym a fireloct
petrenell for a present, which Mr. Hunt formerly gave me.

_November 1._--This day was a festivall day amongst the Japons, and the
hors runing day, to shewte at markes with bowes and arrowes.

_November 2._--I wrote a letter to Mr. Gourney to Syam per way of
Langasaque, per a China, advising how _Sea Adventure_ lost her voyag
last yeare and put into Liquea, and now is ready to com with a cargezon
littell more or lesse as the last yeare, Ed. Sayer and Capt. Adames
going in her. Also that the _Hozeander_ arived heare, Mr. Raphe
Copindell capt., and Mr. Jno. Hunt master; and he and Capt Adames gon
to the Japon court. And how the Duch took a prise at sea, a junk laden
with ebony, the Emperour geving them leave to make a good prise both of
schipp and goods.

_November 3._--The king of Firando banished on of our marenars of our
junck, because Takcamon Dono had banished a yong gentelman for geving
hym a cut with a _cattan_. So the gentelman was recalled and the
marener banished, and Takcamon Dono checked. Also a yong yewth was cut
in peeces for thefte.

_November 5._--A servant of Gonrok Donos came from Miaco this day, and
tould me Capt. Coppindall was retorned from Shrongo and that he was to
com away for Firando forth with.

_November 6._--We bought Jno. Donos howse and _chawne_ over the way for
170 _taies_, and are to pay no rent for it in lending it the last yeare
and this yeare lykwaies, it being a great howse standing aparte neare
to our howse, over the way, fitt to put shipps store or any thing else.
And he is to bring us 30 boates lading of ston on the bargen, to make
walls before it.

I receved 2 lettrs from Capt. Coppindall, 1 dated in Miaco le 24th,
and the other in Osekay le 28 October; and other 2 from Mr. Eaton, 1
in Miaco le 23th, and the other in Osekay le 28 ditto; wherin Capt.
Copindall adviseth me how well the Emperour did receve the present he
carid hym, and gave hym an other of 5 _kerremons_, 10 pike heades, 100
arow heades, and three _waccadashes_, and hath geven us his letter
to the king of Shashman for trad into all his dominions. He also
writes he, the Emperour, sent Capt. Adames to Edo to the padres, to
know wherefore they are com in to his dominions, he haveing formerly
banished all of their coate out of his dominions. He also hath made
proclemation, in payne of death, that no Japon shall goe into New
Spaine from henceforward. These padres are com now out of New Spaine in
a shipp to.

_November 7._--I wrot a letter to Syam to Mr. Gurney, as appeareth per
coppie, and sent it to Langasaque to Melchar van Sanfort to send it per
first junk which goeth from thence, advising Mr. Gurney, or any other
in his place, to provid lading in tyme, knowing before of her coming.
Also I wrot 2 letters, per Capt. China conveance, to the said Melchar
to buy 8000 neales, and to Jorge Durois to buy 5 or 6 _piculls_ rosen.

_November 8._--I receved a lettr from Jorge Durois, dated in
Langasaque, le 14th of Novembr, new stile, wherin he wrot that the king
of Shashma was making ready 400 barkes of warr with all hast, but for
what purpose it is not knowne; and that the Emperour had sumond all the
kinges or _tonos_ in Japon to be at Shrongo in the moneth of Marche
next.

He wrot me of pitch he would buy at Langasaque at 3½ _taies_ per
_picull_.

A Japon called Martin, which Mr. Wickham imploied at Liqueas when he
put Jno. Japon away, did steale a _wacadash_ or dagger with 10 _gocos_
or dishes, and being taken was condemned to be cut in peces. Yet the
kinge saved his lyfe in respect he was of Langasaque, but banished out
of his dominions for ever, in payne of death yf ever he were fownd
heare againe.

_November 9._--The Portuguese, that was capt. of the junck which the
Hollanders took, escaped againe out of the shipp _Ankewsen_ with
fetters on his legges, and, as it is thought, could not be donne but
the wache must know thereof.

Yt was not the Portingale capt. which escaped, but 10 other slaves,
Chinas and Caffros, which did belong to the junck.

Gonrok Dono wrot the King of Firando that he had donne what he could to
set Damian and Jno. at libertie, but that the capt. would doe nothing;
yet, before the shipp went out, he would goe and fetch hym out hym
selfe. This is Gon Rock Donos suttiltie, because he now understandeth
the Emperour hath geven order to sett them at liberty; otherwaies he
had rather they were hanged, to have Damians goods.

_November 10._--The China Capt. receaved a letter from his brother in
Langasaque, of a China junck (or _soma_) which departed from thence for
China with 77 or 78 men in her, but were met by theevs at sea, who cutt
all their throtes and carid away all that was good, and soe the junk
was driven upon the cost of Goto with 7 or 8 dead men in her, the rest
being throwne over board.

Gorezon, our _jurebasso_, pad Pedro five _mas_ on my acco. to buy hym
shewes. Oto, Mat[ingas] slave, ran away; but her surties brought her
back againe. I enquired wherfore she ran away, and she answered because
she wanted occupiing and that she could not endure it.

_November 11._--The China Capt. receaved a letter from his brother to
buy 200 peeces dutts of us and he would send money for them, and buy
them to geve to pore Chinas, to clothe them, that were in two junks
which were cast away, one on the Liqueas and the other on cost Shashma,
som being drowned, and them which escaped were stark naked. He tells me
they will geve these duttis to these Chinas, which dwell most of them
neare Lanquin, and tell them it was the gift of the English, because
they should speake well of our nation in respeck of the matter they
have in hand to procure trade into China. They must pay a _tay_ per
pece for these duttis.

And we receaved a rest of a barell gunpoulder, very bad, which remened
in Zanzabars howse, and put it into our new lodg. Also Mr. Nealson pad
to the scrivano of junck 33 _taies_ 4 _mas_ small plate for marrenis
fish for voyage, according to custom; and the rise they had the 9th
day, rated, as it cost, 93 : 2 : 4.

_November 12._--I went to the King of Firando and tould hym that Mr.
Eaton had advised me that Safian Do[no] said that yf the men were not
sett at libertye upon sight of his letter, that then I should advise
hym thereof, and he would use other meanes. So the king tould me he
would send to Gonrock Dono, to know whether they would set them at
liberty or no. Gonrok Donos man came to viset me, yet willed me I
should not say he was heare. There is duble dealing with them.

_November 15._--Figean Samme, King of Firando, sent for 8 damaskt
snaphanne fowling peeces, to send to Safian Dono for the Emperour. The
price I sett at 20 _taies_ pec., and I wrot a letter to Safian Dono
therof, as also to thank hym for writing to Gonrok Dono about seting
Damian and Jno. at libertie.

_November 21._--A cavelero, on of the kinges men, sent me 5 hense for a
present, and Skite and a Corean each of them a baskit oringes.

_November 22._--Our hostis of Bingana Tome, retorned from Langasaque,
came to see thenglish howse and brought a present of pearse. I sent
a letter per her to Mr. Eaton, to same effect as my former 5 daies
past per kings man. Also I wrot 2 letters to Nangasaque to Melchor van
Sanfort and Jorge Durois for the 8000 neales and 8 barill China oyle
from China Capt. brother to trym _Hozeander_, and sent a boate expres
for it.

_November 23._--The king sent me a letter that he receaved from Gonrok
Dono, wherin he advised hym that he wold sett Damian and Jno. de
Lievano at liberty.

_November 24._--Ther was, to the vallew of 150 _cattis_ wight, lead
stolne out of the _Hozeander_ the night past, out of guners cabben,
which were the covers for the tucholes of great ordinance and other
ould lead rypt of shipp sids in tryminge her. It was taken out of Jno.
Clough the guners cabbyn, and dowbtfull he was of consent; yet on
Robyn, a Scott, is brought in question, he haveing offerd to sell som
before, as also neales which he stole and was taken with them. Ther is,
as Mr. Hunt sayeth, above 200 _cattis_ lead more stolne out of store
rowme, which this Skot with an other Jocky, his cuntreman, are thought
to have at severall tymes made away.

_November 25._--We met a knave Japon, a marrener, whoe ran away
from junck at Liquea. Soe, seeing hym pas the street in Firando and
entertayned into service of the Duch, whoe ordenarely entertayne all
they know to have byn formerly entertayned per us (this is Jacob Specks
humor), yet I laid hands upon this fellow and brought hym before the
justice, and put in sureties to be forth coming to answer to what
should be aledged against hym.

_November 26._--The king sent for a bottell Spanish wyne, and desird to
buy Mr. Osterwickes cloake, being of culler du roy, which he sent unto
hym at price of 20 _taies_. And, as I am enformed, the Portingall capt.
is escaped out of the great Holland shipp, swyming abord to 4 barks
which had layne secretly attending for hym this monthe; for which it is
said Capt. Speck is much offended with Derrick de Vris, the master.

_November 27._--About break of day I receaved a letter from Capt.
Adames, dated in Cocora, the 17th present, how he hoped to be heare
within few dayes, and that he left Capt. Copendale at Miaco not very
well, and that he bringeth _recardo_[119] from themperour to set Damian
and Jno. de Lievana free. And I wrot hym answer forthwith, and sent it
per Gingro the purcer, with 20 _taies_ in 5 plates bars, to spend, yf
occation served, for hym to come overland, becaus he wrot me he had non.

Capt. Adames arived a littell after dyner, and we went to the kinges
pallace to have delivered hym the letters came from thempror and Gota
Zazabra and Saffian Dono; but the kyng was gon a hawkyng, and so we
retorned, leaving the letters with Oyen Dono, his governor.

_November 28._--Capt. Adames went for Langasaque, accompand. with Ed.
Sayer and Mr. Jno. Osterwick, and carid the Emperours authorety to set
Damian Maryn and Jno. de Lievana at liberty.

Capt. Copendall arived heare before nowne.

_November 29._--The 2 barrilles _morofack_, which my host of Osekay
wrot me he had sent me, are not to be fownd in the bark that Capt.
Coppendall came in, and a chist which Mr. Wickham sent with _kerimons_
and other thinges in it, to the vallew of 20 _taies_, is lykewaies lost
in same bark, or else the one nor other was never put into it.

_November 30._--In the after nowne Capt. Adames retornd from
Langasaque, and brought Damian Marin with hym; but Jno. de Lievana
remeaned at Langasaque, sick ashore, they havyng set both Damian and
hym at liberty the day before Capt. Adames arived at Langasaque; but,
as Damian tells me, they had condemned them both to die the death, and
sent hym word to confesse hym and make hym selfe ready, for dye he
must. This passed some moneth agoe, he looking still when he should
die, till the instant they set them at liberty. And then the capt.
thought to have perswaded hym to have gon along with hym, promising hym
mountaynes, and, when he could not preveale, procured hym to sweare he
should not goe with the English nor Hollanders.

_December 1._--I receaved back from Capt. Coppendall the sylver salt,
the 2 spoones, and 2 forkes of silver, lent hym up, with the 2 littell
silver cups or tasters I lent hym. Also he gave me a present of one of
the _kerrimons_ the Emperour gave hym, as also a peece of fine casho or
chowter.

_December 2._--Lues Martin came to Firando and brought me a present
of diet bread, with many wordes of complements, telling me that I was
praid for of many for the charetable deed I did in setting Damian and
Jno. at liberty, and that the capt. of the shipp was in no falt about
the matter, but the Castillanos; in fyne, they are all our enymies,
deadly yf it la in their powers. I was advised he hath byn 8 or 10
daies in towne, and la in his lodging secretly, but for what occation
I know not. I tould hym I heard he had byn in towne some tyme before,
which he denyed not, but said it was to sell silk.

_December 3._--Betyms in the mornyng the kyng sent to envite us to
supper, because he understood our junck was ready to departe towardes
Syam. Our entertaynment was good, only the drynking was overmuch. The
Englishmen that went were, viz. Capt. Coppendall, Capt. Adames, Mr.
Nealson, Ed. Sayer, Jno. Osterwick, and my selfe.

_December 5._--I delivered six hundred powndes str. this day to Capt.
Adames, wherof forty powndes, ten shilling, was in _fybuck_ of Tushma
and the rest in Rs. of 8, which maketh 2400 _taies_.

_December 6._--I sent 20 jarrs bisket and the 500 sheetes paper abord
the junck, and delivered letters to Capt. Adames for the Syam voyage,
viz. 1 to Mr. Jno. Gourney, agent at Syam; 1 to Capt. Jno. Jourden,
agent at Bantam; 1 to Mr. Adam Denton, agent at Cattania; and put into
the packet directed to Mr. Jno. Gourney a bill of lading and cargezon
of all goodes sent; also 3 jars bisket sent, 1 to Mr. Gurney, 1 to Mr.
Sharpe, 1 to Mr. Denton--my owne gifte; with a memoriall delivered
Capt. Adames and Ed. Sayer, how to use busynes, yf they canot attayne
Syam.

Soe the _Sea Adventure_ went of of roade, and the Duch shot of 6 pec.
ordinance at her departure. And presently after Jno. Yoosen went for
Miaco; and the Duch shot affe 9 pec. ordinance at his departure. So
I went abord the junck to Cochi and carid a barill wyne, a baskit
orynges, and an other of pears, and a third of biskit, and so drank to
the health of the company, _nifon catange_, and retorned.

_December 7._--The wind and wether being very fayre, the Sea Adventure
sett saile from Cochi towards Syam this mornyng. God send her a
prosperous voyag.

_December 8._--We wayed out the wax which came in the _Hozeander_, and
fownd it want a tonne; and also we waid the pepper, and it wanted above
2 tonne; which out of dowbt the mareners have embezeled and stolne. And
I sent Niquan, the China Capt. kynsman, to Tushma, to bring the money
for the peper, and wrot hym a letter, I meane to our host, to deliver
hym the money, and, yf in case he would not, I sent a letter to the
Kyng of Tushma to desyre justice. Also I sent our host a present of 2
peces white basta of 8 Rs. per _corg._, and 2 peces blew byrams of 15
Rs. _corge_; and I delivered our host bill unto Niquan for 61 _pc._ 70
_cattis_ peper and 305 bufflos horns.

_December 9._--We got the _Hozeander_ aflote and carid her out, which
we could not doe in 2 springs past.

And there was eight rialles of 8 lent to the China Capt., Andrea
Dittis, to make hym a silver cup, paid hym per my selfe. We laded 40
sowes lead, 30 bales wax, and 50 bagges pepper abord a bark to send for
Osekay.

_December 10._--We put abord a bark to send for Osekay to Mr. Eaton,
viz.

  100 bags peper at 4-23/44 _pico_          0242  3  4{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~}
  65 bales wax at 24 R. 8 per _picull_      1163  7  1
  40 sowes lead at 6 R. _pico_              0440  1  6

          Som totall cargezon amontes to    1846  2  1{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~}


The China Capt. sent Mr. Eaton a jar conserves. And we receaved two
hundred _taies_ plate bars of Andrea Dittis, China Capt., which 200
_taies_ he delivered to Mr. Nealson to lay out about shipps charges.
But he paid Quiamo Dono 10 _taies_ of it, in parte bote hier to cary
those goods above to Osekay, the rest to make it up 35 _taies_ Mr.
Eaton is to pay at Osekay. The merchant that bought peper last yere
offered 6½ _taies peco_ lead, but went from his word and offerd but 6
_tais pico_.

_December 11._--There was sould unto the Kyng of Crates, viz.:--

  60 pec white baftas of 11 R. _corg_ for      90  0  0
  5 pec. tapis Suras                           05  0  0

                                               95  0  0


_December 13._--We paid Jno. Dono seventy _taies_ in plate of bars, in
full payment of the fee symple of the gadonge over the way, to westward
of English howse, wherof one hundred _taies_ was paid before. Derick de
Fries, the master of Duch shipp, being ready to departe, envited us to
dyner to morrow. Our bark with goodes for Osekay retorned.

_December 14._--We dyned abord the great Holland shipp and had 3 pec.
ordinance shot of at our retorne ashore. Capt. Speeck came not to
dyner. He is over great in conceate.

_December 15._--I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois by a China, to send me
of all sortes of garden seeds.

_December 16._--Capt. Whaw, the China Capt. brother, sent me a barrell
of figges or jar of Japon green figges for a present. We envited the
masters of the Hollander shipps and juncks to dyner to morrow, they
being now ready to goe to sea with first good wind.

_December 17._--We envited the Duch to dyner, I say they came to
dyner, and were Derick de Frize, master of great ship, Wm. Johnson,
a merchant, Piter Johnson, master of a junk, the pilot of the greate
ship, and Mr. Fredrick the chirurgion. I would have delivered an open
letter to Derick to have carid, but he tould me he thought that Capt.
Speck would be content to let hym carry our sealed letters, in respect
our ship broght his and delivered them. Yf not, that then he would cary
both our open and also our shut letters.

I receaved two letters from Mr. Eaton from Miaco, 1 of the 23rd
November in Miaco, and the other of the 30th ditto in Osekay, with an
acco. of such matters as he hath donne in Edo, Shrongo, and Osekay, as
also a note what presents Capt. Coppendall gave away above.

Damian retorned from Langasaque with Jno. de Lievana, and Damian sent
me a barill _morofack_ and a dish of peares for a present. Also our
host of Osekay sent me a Japon standish for a present.

_December 20._--I wrot a letter to Bantam to Gapt. Jourden of what
accorrantes have passed since tharivall of the _Hozeander_, as apereth
per coppie, as the lyke for Syam, to Mr. Jno. Gourney, agent, and a
third to Mr. Adam Denton at Pattania, and 2 others to Capt. Wm. Adames
and Ed. Sayer: the first letter to Bantam sent per the ship _Ankewsen_,
under covert from Capt. Jacob Speck, and the other 4 per Piter Johnsons
junck for Syam, under covert as above said, Capt. Speck offring to
send our letters the one or other way, in respect we brought their
letters and delivered them. And 1 letter enclozed to Bantam from Capt.
Coppendall.

_December 21._--There was 350 _tais_ plate bars receaved of Andrea
Dittis, China Capt., wherof 50 _taies_ delivered to Skidayen Dono with
a bar of Oban gould of 55 _taies_, to goe to buy a mast for our ship
_Hozeander_, but 50 _taies_ was bad money and turned back.

_December 22._--About breake of day the Hollanders discharged much
ordinance and small shott, it being their new yeares day. The Duch
junck that they took prize went out of rode of Firando towardes Syam
this day before nowne. And I wrot 2 letters to Mr. Wickham and Mr.
Eaton, dated the 18 and 20th present, but kept till this day, and sent
per the servant of Safian Dono, with a letter in Japans to his master
in answer of recept of his per Capt. Adames and seting free of Damian
and Jno.

_December 23._--This day a boy of 16 yeares ould was cut in peeces
for stealing a littell boate and carying it to an other iland. I sent
to the kyng to beg his lyfe, which he granted me, and in the meane
tyme sent a man after the execusoner to stay a lyttell; but he would
not, but put hym to death before the pardon came, cuting hym in many
mammocks to try their _cattans_ upon hym.

I sent Piter Wadden out to Cochi, with a barill wyne, 10 loves of
bread, and a baskit of oranges, to Piter Johnson, master of the junck
which goeth to Syam, which stayeth there to make acco. with Japonnars
about the reparing of her, the Hollanders haveing emploid a knave about
it which hath deceaved them, as Capt. Adames scrivano hath donne us,
and carid 50 _taies_ with hym which was paid the carpenters upon acco.
of _Hozeander_, and receaved the full payment of junck besids.

_December 24._--Our carpenters came and tould me that yf they might not
have the 50 _taies_ paid them which Mr. Nealson paid the scrivano of
junck, or rather the scrivano deseaved the carpenters and tould them it
was of the junckes acco., when the truth is it was of shipps. Soe we
are forced to pay this 50 _tais_ againe and keepe it upon acco. till
the junk retorne.

There came 3 Spaniardes to our English house, which were of the shipp
which came from Aguapulca. They tould me it was true that 7 or 8 shipps
were in the S. say, and had donne som hurt one the cost of Peru, so
that all was up in armes; and that the Spaniardes in New Spaine had
made proclemacon, in payne of death, that all strangers were to avoid
out of New Spaine and never retorne to trade theare any more.

_December 25._--Chrismas Day. Taccamon Dono sent 2 barilles wyne and
2 fishes for a present; the king 2 pec. wale fyshe; the China Capt. a
jarr of China wine; and other neighbors other trifles per reason of
Chrismas.

_December 26._--I sent our _jurebasso_ to thank the king and Takamon
Dono for the presents they sent, according to Japon order.

The Hollanders had a demi cannon of bras cast this day, po. 5,000
wight, a very fayre peece.

_December 27._--Towardes night Soyemon Dono, the kinges steward, came
to English howse, taking it in his way (as he said) going to the king.
The China Capt. met hym. And his errand was about the money the king
oweth the Wor. Company, which, as he sayeth, the king will now pay in,
and take up comodeties of us to pay next yeare at a resonable rate,
as the Duch have geven it hym, whoe have now sould hym upon trust for
10,000 _taies_. The king, he saieth, taketh this course by littell
and littell to bring hym selfe out of debt, which his granfather left
hym to pay, and so, once getting an even hand, will so hould hym. The
merchandiz he taketh up he geveth to Japons at Miaco, of whome Foyne
Samme took up money in tymes past, which still runeth on at intrest,
and yf it should so contynew would undo hym. So I referd this matter
ofe till to morrow, because I would take counsell, and in the meane
tyme desird him [to say] I was as willing as Capt. Speck to doe the
king any service I could.

Nicolas Grant, a marener, being drunk, stabd hym selfe thorow the arme,
because Mr. Osterwick would not lend hym 12_d._...

_December 28._--The China Capt. built or reard a new howse this day,
and all the neighbours sent hym presentes, _nifon cantange_. So I sent
hym a barill _morofack_, 2 bottells Spanish wine, a drid salmon, and
halfe a Hollands cheese; and after, went my selfe with the nighbours.
Where I saw the seremony was used, the master carpenter of the kinge
doing it, and was as followeth: First they brought in all the presentes
sent and sett them in ranke before the middell post of the howse, and
out of eache one took something of the best and offred it at the foote
of the post, and powred wyne upon each severall parcell, doing it in
greate humilletie and silence, not soe much as a word spoaken all the
while it was a doing. But, being ended, they took the remeander of the
presentes, and soe did eate and drink it with much merth and jesting,
drinking themselves drunken all or the most parte. They tould me they
beleeved that a new howse, being hallowed in this sort, could not chuse
but be happie to hym which dwelled in it, for soe their law taught
them, ordayned by holy men in tymes past.

The shipps company came to the English howse in a maske, and after
plaied Christmas ule games in good sort and meryment.

_December 29._--I gave Matinga a pece satten, cost 5 _taies_, and
a peece of taffety, cost 1 _tay_, to make her a _kerremon_, and 2
_kerremons_ of zelas to Oto and Fuco. And ther was sould and deliverd
10 _cattis_ Priaman pepper to the kinges doctor of phisick, rated at 8
_condrins_ per _catty_, or 8 taies _picull_.

And I thought good to note downe how Mr. Hunt, the master, came in a
fume ashore, and broake Jno. Cocora the cooks head, at instigation of
Jno. Shipperd, he having first misuesed and beaten hym without reason.

_December 30._--We bought 732 bags white lyme at 3 _condrins_ per bagg,
it being good cheape. And I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois to look out
for _morofack_ and cows shewet for shipps use for chirurgion. God send
health.

A China of Lankyn brought me a present of a barill of Lankyn wyne and a
dozen of China cakes.

_December 31._--I paid therty _taies_ for a howse for Matinga, that
shee was in being for the Company.

And the Japon barber Rappado sent me a present of a basket of oringese.

I forgot to note downe how I wrot a few lynes to Mr. Jno. Hunt, to have
had hym com ashore about Compa. busynes, to have had his advice about
bras shivers;[120] but he retorned me a snapish answer.

_January 1, 1615[6]._--Mr. Hunt, the master of the _Hozeander_,
remenyng still in his extreme humours (as I have fownd hym allwaies
the same man ever since he came into Japon), wrot a letter to Capt.
Coppendall, he being sick in bed (as he hath byn most an end ever since
he retorned from Miaco), and I verely think that the unruly company of
the shipp to be the cheefe occation--I say he advised Capt. Coppendall
he would com ashore to morrow and geve direction how to cast bras
shivars and shot for ordinance, aledging the guner knew nothing for
shott, nor no man else but hym selfe for the rest. Yet, for my parte,
I rest dowbtfull whether it be soe or noe, only I wrot hym before in
frendly sort to com ashore and assist me in these matters for the
service of the Wor. Company, our emploiers, because the Duch sent
away shipp after ship yerly full laden with shot, powlder, ordinance,
victuells, and munision, and I would in som sort geve a reason or tast
to our emploiers of these matters and send them samples with price.
But, as it should seeme, the master disenableth all but hymselfe, and
others hould back, I know not whether upon sutteltie to leave the other
in lurch, as debasing all but hym selfe. But be it the one or other,
the Companies busynes rests undon, etc., and the very truth is, here
doe I confes before God and the world, I never did see a more unruly
compa. of people, and are far worse then they in the _Clove_, allthough
they were bad enough.

And yisternight, very late, came on Jno. Shippard, a tapstar as I
understand, and in very deed a shuffling fello, not worthy water for
his hier. He is a turbulent fello, a make bate, and sett the master
at odds with others per meanes of his smouthe tong, and yet a drunken
fello, as most of the rest are the lyke; and came againe into the
kitchin to quarrell with our cooke at supper tyme, I desyring Mr.
Osterwick to put hym out of the howse and send hym abord the shipp;
but he fell upon Mr. Osterwick, and puld his clothes afe his back, and
misused hym, for which I put hym in the bilboes to cowle his feete till
mornyng.

_January 2._--I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois to buy 100 or 200 tallo
candelles and bring them with hym. And Matinga went into her new howse
this day. And Gorezan, our _jurebasso_, removed his howse, and came
with wife and famely and dwelt in the Companis howse over the way, to
keepe the shopp or shew rowme.

_January 3._--This mornyng very cold wether, being a greate snowe,
the greatest I saw since our arivall in Japon, with a stiffe gale
wind northerly, rack from W. all day, and snow per fitts all day, but
littell or non per night. The King of Firandos host at Osekay came
againe and brought a present of figges, telling me he was to retorne
to his howse, the king haveing rewarded hym well, as all the caveleros
in his kingdom did the lyke, towardes the setting him up a new howse,
his ould being burned in the wars with all that ever he had. Soe, with
consent of Capt. Coppendall and the rest, ther was a bar of plate of 4½
_taies_ and a bag of rise of 51 _gantes_ geven hym and sent after hym
to his lodging.

There was delivered to the fownder for formes as followeth: 1 bras
shiver of the boate; 1 rownd shot of saker; 1 langrell shot of saker;
1 crosbar shot of minion; 5 braz of severall sortes--to make others
by. And I agreed with hym as followeth: to make 5 greate bras shivers
of 35 or 86 _cattes_ per shiver; 5 others of a lesser sise: 3 others
of sise of that of boate; 2 others of bigger sise; 1 quintall bras of
severall sortes--and to pay 12 _taies_ per _pico_ for all, on with
an other, ready made, the fownder finding all stuffe. Also 100 saker
shott, ½ round and other ½ crosbar; 100 minion shot, ½ rownd and other
½ crosbar; 50 saker langrell shott, all iron--price made at 14 _mas_
per _pico_ or 100 wight Japon. I was forsed to put out these at hazard
per ould shott and shivers, the master, Jno. Hunt, not coming to geve
direction, nether at my request and writing, nor at sending for of
Capt. Coppendall, refusing ever to enter againe into the English howse.
I could say much of this frantick master, Jno. Hunt; but I leve it to
other men to tell.

Also the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, had a littell brod cloth, pink
culler, to make his littell doughter a peare of stockinges or bowtes
this cold wether.

And there was 3 sackes rise, of 50 _gantes_ per sack, geven to 3 pore
Chinas which lost their junck per tempest of the cost of Shashma and
came to the China Capt. for releefe, he geveing eche of them a sack
rise and a _tay_ in plate. And upon good consideracion I gave them, per
generall consent, each one a sack, as above said.

Mr. Dorington late at night came to the English howse, and tould me the
master sent hym to tell me the mast was wolled,[121] and ready to bring
ship to a caryne.

_January 4._--I went to the Duch howse and desired Capt. Speck to send
us his helpe and people to bring our shipp to a caryn, as formerly in
frenshipp they had promised us; which in good sort he assented unto,
and sent for the masters of the great shipp and junck and willed them
and the rest to aide us in what they might. These men came at Capt.
Specks first sending for, and did what he ordayned, but Mr. Hunt sent
me word he would never com in the English howse, upon a lunetike
humour, which each man telleth me is his condition not only heare, but
at Pattania and elsewhere hath donne the lyke. Soe I went abord and
saw them turne up the ships keele, but water came in so fast at port
holes and else where that they were forced to right her againe to cawke
her better. I tould Mr. Hunt I was com to vizet hym abord, althoughe
he sent me word he would not com ashore, yet willed hym hereafter to
com when I sent for hym, or else I would fetch hym. Also I willed hym
to send Jno. Shepperd ashore to dresse the Companies meate; which he
denyed at first, but after sent hym.

And Zanzabar, _allius_ Yasimon Dono, came to vizet me at English howse,
and brought me a present of oringes and a barrill of wine, and sent 2
men to helpe to bring downe the shipp.

_January 5._--Zanzabers littell doughter came to vizet me, and brought
a present of wyne, orenges, eggs, and fysh drest. And an ould man of
Miaco, now our neighbour, brought me a banketting box for a present.
His name is Ito Yoguiche Dono.

Sangero Samme, sonne to Foyne Samme, was this day made sure to a
doughter of a noble man of Crates.

Their was 210 _cattis_ ould junk or rops put out to toose[122] for
occom, wherof 50 _cattis_ to Domingo, and 160 _cattis_ to Unquan the
China.

_January 6._--Sugen Dono of Crates sent to borrow a peare of _bubes_,
he haveing invited the King of Firando to dyner, in respect he had
geven or augmented his yearly stipend from 500 _gocos_ per anno. to
1000 per anno.

Capt. Speck came to the English howse with Derick de Vryz and others to
take leave, the great shipp being ready, as they said, to goe out. They
had byn with the kyng before they came to us, and, as it seemed, had
drunk hard. It is said they gave a present worth 5000 _taies_ to the
kinge, but I canot beleeve it. Once they have geven much in respect of
the prize they brought in, as also for lycence to carry out munision,
victuelles, and men for the Molucos.

_January 7._--The greate Duch shipp, called the _Ankewsen_, went out to
Cochi, and I went abord with our bark with 16 men, to rowe and helpe to
toe them out, as the king sent many barks to doe the lyke; and I carid
2 barilles wyne, 3 hense, 2 duckes, 3 fyshes, 20 loves fresh bread, and
a baskit of oringes, and dronke to their good voyage; which Capt. Speck
tooke in good parte, and sent his _jurebasso_ with complemento, _nifon
catange_.

Zanzebars wives brothers and her father were abord, and made peace with
Jno. Gorezano, our _jurebasso_.

_January 8._--We had made price before with Andrea Dittis for all our
lead at 6 _taies_ per _pico_; but now a Japon offring us 6½ _taies_ per
_pico_, he was content to let us sell hym the one halfe.

Also I receaved 3 letters from Langasaque, 1 from Jorge Durois with
16 falling bands at 7 _mas_ per band. And an ould China brought me a
present of China cakes.

_January 9._--This last night, about 10 a clock, 4 Portingale prisoners
ran away out of the Duch howse and are scaped and thought got to
Langasaque.

Yasimon Dono advised me of a man of his com from Miaco, who reporteth
of very fowle wether above, and that 70 or 80 barks are cast away per
meanes therof. God send us good news of ours sent to Osekay and Tushma.

_January 10._--Three of the Portingales which ran away were fownd per
meanes of men the King of Firando sent out after them, and brought back
againe to the Hollanders.

Gizamon Dono, Zanzabers wives brother, brought me 3 wilduckes for a
present. He tould me that word was brought to the kyng that 80 barkes
are cast away betwixt this and Shiminaseke now of late per torment,
most being laden with rise. God bless our bark sent with merchandize.

_January 11._--The king being ready to goe up to the Emperour, we laid
out a present and sent hym, I going after, accompanid with Mr. Nealson
and Mr. Osterwick:--

  2 damaskt fowling peeces.
  5 pec. white baftas of 20 Rs. _corg._
  5 pec. blew byrams of 15 Rs. _corg._
  5 pec. red zelas of 12 Rs. _corg._
  5 pec. borall or foota chader.
  5 pec. chader Cambaia.
  5 pec. buxshaws.

The king tooke the present very kindly, offring us anything we would
demand, saying that, allthough he went up to the Emperour, yet he
had left such order with his governor that what we asked should be
fulfilled. This present was sent this day, because yisterday Soyeman
Dono came to aske what money the king owed upon bill, for that yt
should be paid forthwith. Whereupon it was thought fitt to goe with
this present before payment were made, otherwais yt might be thought it
was sent in respect he paid the money, or else, perhaps, in payinge of
it, he might have expected a greater present, in respect the Hollanders
gave soe much once. Howsoever, he seemed to take it in good parte, and
gave us a kind welcom with a colation, serveing us with his owne handes.

_January 14._--Letters came to Capt. Speck that the junk they sent for
Syam is per contrary wind put into Shashma in a port or haven called
Cata ura, and soe loose ther voyage.

And I paid 50 _tais_ plate bars to the fownder, advanced upon acco.,
for bras shivers and other matters with shot for ordinance, which he
is to cast for to send in the _Hozeander_. The 2 fownders are called
Jembio Dono and Scongero Dono.

There came certen caveleros Japons from Edo, and came to see the
English howse, and looked on such comodeties as we had, but bought non.
They report that the Emperour will have all the kyngs (or _tonos_) in
Japon to goe for Edo, and there to remeane for the space of 7 yeares,
and to carry their wives with them, and live every one in his howse
aparte, with a servant of the Emperours to be allwaies in company with
them--I meane with each one, to heare and see what passeth. This he
doeth to prevent them from insurrections, and will not have sonns nor
kynsmen, but the kinges them selves.

_January 15._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton to Edo, per Toyamon Dono, a
merchant of that place, advising of my other sent 6 dais past, and here
withall sent as followeth, viz.:--

  10 _cattis_ tobaco to his host, cost 2 mas 3 _condr._ _catty_.
  33 eggs to his hostice, cost 1 _mas_ 9½ _condrins_.
  10 _cattis_ tobaco to hym selfe, cost as _supra_.
  02 Faccata gerdells for hym selfe for 3 _mas_ peece.

And advised withall that Mr. Wickham should make all the hast he could,
for that Capt. Coppendall and Mr. Nealson were very sick.

_January 16._--Rowland Thomas, the purcer of the _Hozeander_, being
drunk, did beat Mr. Dorington, master mate, Jno. Cocera the cook, and
the servantes in the howse.

_January 17._--There was receaved of the kinges plate this day three
hundred fyfty and seven _taies_ in plate of bars upon acco., sent from
Oyen Dono per Refioen Dono, kinges steward.

_January 18._--We reconed this day with Tomo Dono and rest for biskit,
and waid out as followeth, viz.:--

  To Capt. Adames          0290 _cattis_.
  To Syam voyag            0556 _cattis_.
  To a present to Duche    0010 _cattis_.
  To _Hozeander_           3806 _cattis_.

  Som totall receaved      4662 _cattis_.


And within night word was brought me how two of our shipps company were
fighting with swords one a hill a littell from our English howse. Soe
I went with Mr. Hunt the master and Mr. Osterwick and fownd them to be
Jno. Clough the guner and Jno. Driver an ordenary marrener, both being
drunken, and no hurt donne but that Driver had a scar on his forehead.
Soe I put them both in the bilbows till the next mornynge.

_January 19._--Our host of Tushma came to English howse, and brought a
present of walnuts and a Corea carpet or feltro. He tould me he brought
merchandiz to sell to pay me the money the pepper was sould for, for
that the money of the place he receaved for it was not good, as Niquan
the China whome I sent to receive it could witnes, he turning back
above 500 _taies_ in receving 120 _tais_.

Mr. Dorington, the mr. mate of _Hozeander_, mad show as though he were
lunatick, talking idly; but I thynk he counterfeteth. A strange kind
of people they are all of them which came in this shipp. Truly I canot
praise any one of them which are sea men.

The Hollanders shott ofe 8 or ten pec. ordinance out of the small shipp
and out of howse late within night. The occation we knew not, except
the junk went out or that they had hard news that gave them content.

_January 20._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Jourden to Bantam, how the
_Hozeander_ would be ready per the end of this moneth and how Mr.
Osterwick was to stay heare, with other accurants, and sent it per
conveance of Capt. Speck in the _Ankewsen_. I went to the Duch howse
and delivered Capten Speck my letter. He tells me the occation they
shot off the ordinance the last night was for that the King of Firando
came to drink a farewell with them before he went up, and that the
greate shipp and the junck would be ready to goe towardes Bantam within
7 or 8 daies at ferthest. He also tould me that he receved not letter
of the putting of their junck into Shashma, as it was reported unto me.

_January 21._--I delivered two hundred and threeskore rialles of 8 to
Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., to change into other plate for China
busynes. More, delivered unto hym at same tyme one bag Rs. of 8 as it
came out of England, containing one hundred pownd str., is fyve hundred
rialles of eight for same purpose. For both which sommes he is to bring
refined plate to send in the _Hozeander_. This is donne because the
nobles in China should think this plate or rialls com from the English,
rather then to present them with refined plat of this place. The China
Capt. sent Niquan his kinsman with these rialls to bring plate back
forthwith.

Jno. Osterwick going abroad with Mr. Nealson got a littell more drinke
than was needfull, and the other was littell better. Yet Jno. Osterwick
fell into termes of comparison, disinabling each one but hymselfe. I
know not what to say of hym but that he is an overweenyng prowd yowth,
I haveing had no experience yet but only by report of Capt. Coppindale.

And late in the night, after we were gon to bed, the kinges _bongew_
sent to borrow our boate, or _foyfone_,[123] for the king service;
which I lent hym.

The small junck was retorned to the China Capten, but much out of
reprations, which must be amended according to promis, for without her
we could not have carined our shipp, and soe she had lost her monson
this yeare.

_January 23._--I gave 6 _taies_ plate bars to Matinga to provide things
against the new yeare. And I paid a bar of plate to Domingo my boy, to
buy hym aparell, containing 2 _tay_ 1 _ma_. And I reconed with Jno.
Gorezano for 6 _tais_, 9 _mas_, viz.

                                                 _ta. ma. con._
  Pro 4 peare sheews and slippers for myselfe      01  0   0
  Pro a silver touthpicker for my selfe            02  1   0
  Pro 2 pere _tabis_[124] for Beecho               00  3   5
  Pro strings for Beechos shews                    00  0   8
  Pro a pere shew for Beecho                       00  0   4
  Pro a lock for Beechos chist                     00  1   2
  Pro 2 peare _tabis_ for Jeffrey                  00  3   2
  Pro string for Jeffres shews                     00  0   8
  Pro a pear shews for Jeffrey                     00  0   4
  Pro 2 barrilles wyne I sent to Taccamon with     00  8   4
    fish
  Pro 1 _mas_ paid the shewmakers sonne for roses  00  1   0
  Pro 1 _mas_ geven the fisherman of Cochi         00  1   0
  Pro 20 _tattamis_[125] for Matingas howse        02  4   0
  Pro 20 _cattis_ tobaco sent to Miaco, at 2 _mas_ 04  6   0
    3 _con_.
  Pro 2 Faccata gerdelles for Mr. Eaton            00  6   0
  Pro mattes to make up the tobaco                 00  0   7

                                                   12  8   4
                                                   6   9   0

                                                   5   9   4


Rests 5 _ta._ 9 _m._ 4 _c._ which Mr. Nealson paid unto hym, and put it
upon my acco.

_January 24._--I paid fyftie _taies_ plate bars to Andrea Dittis, China
Capt., for reprations to his junk lent to carin our ship _Hozeander_,
she haveing broken and spoild the junck that the carpenters asked
100 _taies_ to have mended her. Newes was brought to towne that the
Emperour is dead; but I beleeve rather it is a fable and geven out of
purpose to see how people wold take the matter. Once the ould man is
subtill.

_January 25._--Damian Marin fell out with Jno. de Lievana about
comparisons betwixt the English and Duch, Damian takeing parte with the
Duch and Jno. with the English.

_January 26._--The king sent Soyemon Dono, Skrayamon Dono, and another
to look upon our comodeties, to the entent to buy for 2 or 3000 _tais_
at tyme. Soe we showed them samples of all and set price; but he took
lyking only of pepper at 6 _taies pico_, baftas at 10 R. per pies,
buxshaws at 9 _mas_ pec., boralles at 9 _mas_ pec., chint at 3½ _mas_
pec., and cader Macoy at 4 _mas_ pec. And tould the China Capt. he
would com and vizet me before he went to Miaco, to morrow or the next
day.

_January 27._--Capt. Speck came and requested that we would take into
our shipp for Bantam as much ebony as we could in not pestering our
shipp, and he would pay what fraight we thought fitt. And he sent me a
baril _morofack_ and 4 boxes swet meate.

Also the king sent me word he would com to breckfast to morrow mornyng.
So I mad the best provition I could, and the China Capt. sent me 2
powderd storkes, and Soyemon Dono a baskit oranges.

And Tome Donos sonne retorned from Miaco and sent me a present of Japan
figges. He tells me our bark with the goods is safe arived at Sackay,
but brought no letter from Mr. Eaton nor Mr. Wickham.

_January 28._--The King of Firando came to dyner to the English
howse, accompanid with 7 or 8 caveleros, and took in good parte the
entertaynment he had, and gave me a _keremon_, and a cloake to our
_jurebasso_. He said he was to stay 3 or 4 yeares above at Edo; soe I
think it is true that the _tonos_ (or kinges) must stay 7 yeares, as I
noted som daies past. There was three peeces ordinance shott affe at
his entry into the English howse, and 5 at his departure.

_January 29._--In the after nowne Soyemon Dono with 3 others came to
the English howse, to receve the comodeties which the king would buy
upon trust; but they tould me the Hollanders had sould the king pepper
at 5 _taies_ the _pico_, and therefor thought I would not aske more.
I answerd that, yf the Hollanders set pepper at that rate, they sell
other comodetis at a hier, which, it might be, cost them nothing but
the suting of a peece of ordinance, as silke at 240 _taies_ the _pico_,
etc. And, it might be, in pollecie set pepper loe, to the extent to
cros us and soe ether to make us to sell it better cheape then it cost
or else to make us fall into dislyke of the king, and by this meanes
get themselves favour and us disgrace. But the truth was, I set it at
no hier a rate then I sould to others for ready money, and at such a
price as I wold promis them to deliver no more at that rate. But for
broad cloth, which they set at 14 _taies_ per _tattamy_, and Syam wood
at 3½ _taies_ the _pico_, that I would sell hym at same rate, when
our shipps and junck arived. Yet, doe I what I could, they said they
durst not with their honor geve more then the Duch sould for. Soe we
concluded to send the pepper to Osekay to Mr. Eaton at kinges charg,
and he to sell it, and then to deliver the procead in money to the
king. And so that matter was ended. But we delivered comodety to them
for acco. of king as followeth, viz.:--

  Baftas, white,     196 pec. of 11 Rs. _corg._  }
  Eidem, lower,      101 pec. of 20 Rs. _corg._  }
  Eidem, lower lodg. 201 pec. of 11 Rs. _corg._  } at 1 _tay_ pec.
  Eidem, lo. lodg,   120 pec. of 15 Rs. _corg._  } _ta. m. co._
  Eidem, up. lodg,   100 pec. of divers sortes   }  718  0  0
                     ---                         }
         Som baftas, 718 peces divers prises     }

  Chader Rese Canary,  185 pec. lower of 4 Rs. _corg._
  Chader eidem,        090 pec.

           Som chader, 275 pec.

  Boralles, 100 pec., lodg beloe  }    at 1 _tay._
  Buxshaws, 100 pec., lodg beloe  }    200  0  0

_January 30._--The master, Jno. Hunt, envited us abord the _Hozeander_
to dyner. Mr. Wickham and my selfe retorned sowne after ashore
upon occation of busynes, and had 5 pec. ordinance shot ofe at our
departure, and the other 3 peeces when they came ashore.

And George Durois came to Firando and brought 2 jarrs of conserves,
and he gave me in present as followeth: a box of marmalad, a box of
cracknells, a box suger bred, a box of chistnuts, a bottell of Spanish
wine.

The Duch junck went out of rode Firando to Cochi, and there came to
anker by the great ship _Ankewsen_.

_January 31._--I receved 600 _taies_, I say six hundred _taies_, plat
bars of Mr. Ric. Wickham, which he brought from Mr. Eaton, receved in
parte of payment for lead sould at Osekay at 74 _mas_ per _pico_.

And in the after nowne Capt. Speck came to the English howse, and tould
me that Gonrok Dono had sent hym a letter from Langasaque, advising
hym as a frend (as he said) that he should geve the Hollanders warnyng
befor their shipping went out, as the lyke to the English, that they
should take heed they did not meddell with the greate ship of Amacon,
for that the Emperour had much adventure in her. Yet I say I wish we
might take her and then make the reconying after.

_Febrary 2._--I gave a present to a merchant of Miaco, whoe gave me a
fayre banqueting box before, viz.: 2 pec. byrams, white; 2 pec. byrams,
nill, of 15 R. _corg._--these are of the Companis goodes--2 pec. chader
Lullawy of my owne. He took it in good parte, and offerd to doe our
nation any service he could above at Miaco. Mr. Wickham gave me a
_keremon_ of them Sada Dono gave hym at Edo.

_Febrary 3._--The night past, about 11 a clock, there was a house sett
on fire by necklegence of the people which made it cleane against the
great feast of ther new yeare, which is within this 3 dayis. Soe ther
was 7 howses burned downe; and had it not byn for the English and Duch,
most parte of the towne had byn burned. For each one stood gazing one
and did nothing, and divers brought their goods into our English howse
for savegard.

Ther was a present geven to Torasemon Dono, a principall man in this
place, which never had any thing geven unto hym since our arivall in
Japon, which our frends tould us of. Soe he had geven

  3 pec. byrams, white.
  3 pec. byrams, nill, of 15 Rs. _corg._
  3 pec. red zelas, of 12 Rs. _corg._
  3 pec. boralles, of 5 Rs. _corg._
  42 _cattis_ pepper.

And the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, went with me to viset hym, and
carid hym a great jar of biskit. And I gave a _kerimon_ to Matingas
father, which Mr. Eaton gave unto me.

Paid 6 _mas_ small plate to the fownder for 2 pans for Matinga.

And the kinge sent to have a gathering throughout Firando towardes the
releeving the pore people whose howses were burnt; towardes which we
gave a _tay_ in plate.

And paid the carpenter for mending Matingas howse

  Pro 26½ dais carpt. work or wagis           3  7  2
  Pro 30½ days work laborers                  1  5  2½
  Pro neales                                  1  0  9
  Pro bordes and tymber                       1  9  8

  Som totall                                  8  3  1½


And I delivered 25 _tais_ plate bars more unto the fownders, upon acco.
of bras shivers which are waid out this day, being 6 _picos_ and 42
_cattis_.

Mr. Nealson, being drunck (as very often he is the lyke, to my greefe),
fell a brawling with the chirurgion, Morris Jones, and cut his head
with his dagger.

Soyemon Dono came late and brought the kinges bill for three thousand
_taies_ plate of bars, to be paid within this yeare for merchandiz
sould hym. And I delivered hym in the King of Firando's bill for 1000
_tais_, lent at Edo 2 yeares past.

I gave 2 falling bandes with lace to Mr. Wickham, cost me 2 _tais_.

_Febrary 4._--Mr. Wickham fell into his ould humours of comparisons,
misusing me. I think it is because he would goe for Bantam in the
_Hozeander_, which I am well contented of. He presumeth the more,
because Capt. Jourden wrot hym a letter he would geve hym preferment.

_Febrary 5._--I mad acco. this day with Oyen Dono and Shoske Dono for
ould debt of the kinge, which they say is 950 _ta._ 1 _m._ 0 _co._; but
I find it to be but 898 _ta._ 6 _m._ 3½ _co._

  Cushcron Dono, a box _muches_[126]                     } new
  Yasimon Dono, a barill _morofak_                       } years
  And his father in la, a _barso_ wyne and a salmon      } giftes.
  Jno. Japon, a bundell figges                           }

And we waid out the shot for ordinance.

And Mr. Nealson made recept for 25 _tais_ pad the fownders, and he
paid them to ballance 14 : 5 : 5.

_Febrary 6._--The fownders reconyng was as followeth:--

                                                           _ta. m. co._
  For 641 _cattis_ in bras shivers, at 12 _tay_ per _pico_  76 9   2
  For 296 rownd shot sacar and mignion, at 14 _cn._         04 1   3
    per _catty_
  For 230 crosbar and langrell shot, at 25 _mas_ per _pico_ 05 7   5

  Som totall amonts unto                                    86 8   0

The fownders brought present, 2 iron pans with wyne and fysh.

And Mr. Nealson receaved 76 _ta._ 5 _m._ 0 _co._ of Keemon Dono, for
acco. of Kyng of Crates, wherof 56 _tais_ was good and rest Shrongo.
More, he receaved of the servant of Semidone, for acco. of the King of
Crates, fyfty _tais_ plate bars, wherof 1 bar Shrongo.

_Febrary 7._--Mr. Jno. Hunt, master of the _Hozeander_, delivered me a
draught of his voyag from Bantam to this place with all the sownding.

_Febrary 8._--Receaved in plate bars of China Capt., Andrea Dittis,
fowre hundred and fyftie _taies_; and sowne after eight hundred _taies_
in melted plat more of hym.

And we had a generall counsell this day, wherin it was noted downe that
Capt. Raphe Coppendall was ordayned by generall consent to goe up to
the Emperour with a present. Also that Mr. Richard Wickham should have
an alowance of 150 _taies_ per anno., to fynd hym aparell and other
necessaries from our first arivall in Japon untill the last of August,
1615, we ariveing the 12th June, 1613. And that Mr. Jno. Osterwick
should stay to keepe the bookes, and be alowed 20_l._ per ano. to fynd
hym aparell and other necessaries, to begyn in Aprill last at his
coming from Bantam. And that Jno. Coker, an Englishman, should stay for
cooke in the English house, which is donne by his owne consent. And
Mr. Wickham to goe up to lye at Miaco or Osekay, till other occation
busynes be to employ hym in. And Mr. Eaton to com to Firando and goe to
Tushma, to cleare in that place.

Soyemon Donos bark was set on fyre per neclegence of his servantes,
beeing drunk and feasting abord according to Japon fation, this day,
but by good helpe was sowne quenched.

Capt. Speck came to the English howse and offred to make a consort to
have their small shipp and ours to stay to take the Amacon shipp and
the great shipp to goe for Bantam; but it was not thought fyt soe to
loose our monson.

_Febrary 9._--I wrot a letter to Jorge Durois to send stockinges and
candells, and sent it per bark sent per China Capt. to buy gunpolder
and pitch or rosen for _Hozeander_. We laded all the bras shivers and
shot abord the _Hozeander_ this day.

The bedell of the ward had 1 sack rise.

_Febrary 10._--We laded 14 _picos_ copper and 3 _picos_ iron abord the
_Hozeander_ this day.

Shezque Dono, Sugien Donos father, came to the English howse and
brought a present of _mushos_, wyne, and redish, _nifon catange_, with
many words of complemento. And the sea _bongews_ brought presentes.

_Febrary 11._--Gonrock sent me money for 155 _catts_ Priaman pepper for
Emperors accompt, at 7 _tais_ per _pico_, is 10 _ta._ 8 _m._ 5 _co._ As
also 30 _tais_ for chaders, cambias, and buxshaws, which one of his men
bought on trust. All which money I receaved.

_Febrary 12._--Torasemon Dono came hym selfe to the English house, and
brought a present of a _barso_ wyne and 2 faisant cocks.

_Febrary 14._--The king departed this day to goe to the Emperour, and
had 13 peces ordinance shot out of the _Hozeander_ and 5 out of the
Duch barke, with 8 or 10 chambers out of Duch house. I went out with
a banket of sweetmeate, 2 barilles wyne, a jarr of biskit, and 30 wax
candelles; which he took in very good part, and after sent me word by a
servant that it had sufficed to have sent any one in the howse, and not
to have com my selfe.

Mr. Hunt, the master of the _Hozeander_, fell into termes with Capt.
Coppendall about Rowland Tomas, the purcer, telling hym he did hym not
right about the abuse was formerly offred, and that the said Tomas
should find it when they were at sea. These were bad wordes, and were
because the said master might not keepe the kayes and domenere over the
purcer in matters of hold. But it is thought that the wax was gon out
of hold per lyke meanes.

_Febrary 15._--Mr. Nealson paid Jno. Cokora the cooke ten _tais_ and a
halfe in great plate, upon acco. of his wagis, to cleare with them he
is indebted unto.

And Capt. Speck sent me word he would let as have 2 _picos_ poulder,
yf we stood in neede. Of which offer I accepted. And Capt. Speck lent
us 50 sheetes paper.

Mr. Hunt desired to have a councell assembled tuching the abuse offred
to hym per Rowland Tomas; which was donne. But more falt to be imputed
to the master, Jno. Hunt, then the other. Soe we made them frendes.

_Febrary 16._--Moris Jones the chirurgion had 12 _tais_ plate bars paid
hym per Mr. Nealson, agreed upon per councell for his pains. And Jno.
Cocora the cooke, upon acco. his wagis, 11 _tais_.

_Febrary 17._--Niquan, the China Capt. kinsman, retorned from
Langasaque and brought 370 _cattis_ pitch or rozen, cost 14 _tais_; and
310 _cattis_ gunpoulder, cost 64 _tas._ 1 _mas_; and for the bark 02
_tais_. And Capt. Speck sent the 2 barilles gunpolder which he promised.

_Febrary 18._--We waid out the pepper to day for the king, and had much
adoe with the 10 men of ward who crinched[127] for wight; soe it must
be waid over to morrow againe. 77 bags this day did way 49 _pico_ 96
_cattis_, and 80 bags out of China Capt. lodg, 57 _pico_ 35½ _cattis_.
And I gave my case China bottelles of 12 to Capt. Coppendall.

_Febrary 19._--We cleared acco. of the 3,000 _tais_ this day with the
King of Firandos _bongews_, and delivered them merchandiz for 121 : 3 :
5.

Unagense Dono sent me a present of 2 barsos wine, 2 Japon cakes (or
_muchos_), and 2 mallardes. And we receaved 49 coks of bras of fownder.

Capt. Speck wrot me a letter, desyring to have the master or purcer of
_Hozeander_ to make a bill lading of the ebony sent in _Hozeander_,
being 927 loggs (or sticks), containing, as he said, 929 _picos_. Soe
the purcer, Rowland Tomas, made hym 2 bills of the number of loggs, but
not of wight, to deliver it to the Duch present at Bantam.

_Febrary 20._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Speck to will hym send a note
under his ferme to pay fraight for the ebony, as shall be thought
fyting betwixt the 2 agents, English and Duch; as also to send the
price and wight of the 2 barrilles of polder, which Jacob Swager tould
me waid 200 _cat._ nett. And after, Capt. Speck sent word it cost him
16 _tais_ per _pico_, is 32 : 0 : 0.

The _Hozeander_ went out to Cochi, and shot offe 5 pec. ordinance; and
the Duch shot ofe 7 or 8 chambers at Holland howse. And I went abord
Derick de Frize, and had 3 pec. ordinance shot of at my going away, and
at retorne from _Hozeander_, 3 more. And Capt. Speck sent Jacob Swager
abord the _Hozeander_ as we went out, with a present of 3 barrilles
wyne, 4 greate fishes, and 6 hense. And I gave a peece of watcht[128]
damaske to Rowland Tomas, purcer of the _Hozeander_, in requitall of
a small rough diamond in a ryng of gould he gave me the other day,
esteemed worth som 4 or 5 _taies_. Also I gave the chirurgion, Mouris
Jones, a peece red damaske and a R. of 8 in money for his payns taken
in howse, and for a bag of synomond and a box of mace he gave me.

_Febrary 21._--I delivered to China Capt. a bag of rialles of eight,
containing 500 R. of 8 in it, is 400 _tais_; and receaved 300 _tais_
in plate of bars of hym. And I waterd and new packed up the amber
greese in 2 leaden pots, same as before, and the musk in an other,
marked as followeth:--

       _catt. ta. m._
  32 A.   5   4   2  }
     B.   4   9   8  } is 9 _catt._ 14 _tay_ wt. amber gris.
     C.   4   0   0  musk in 86 cods, cost 048 0 0

being marked with the Companis mark. And packed up all three in one
chist under same marke without number, and put abord the _Hozeander_.

And I receaved a letter from Jorge Durois with a baskit containing 120
tallo candells of 6 for a _mas_, with 4 pere silke stockings, viz. 2
peare at 9 _pezos_ or R. 8, 2 peare at 7 _tais_ plate bars, and 4 peare
cuffes and 1 band, cost 1 _tay_.

_Febrary 22._--Capt. Coppendall had a runlet of pery I gave hym. And I
delivered in three bills to Semidone, viz.:--

  1 bill of 70 _tais_, due of ould.
  1 bill of 50 _tais_, for merchandize sould.
  1 bill of 20 _tais_, for a gun.

And he gave me a new bill of 250 _tais_, wherof 116 : 5 : 0 was owing
upon ould acco., and 133 : 5 : 0 goodes delivered at Miaco per Mr.
Eaton, is 250 : 0 : 0 now owing, to pay at a yeare.

And Andrea Dittis, China Capt., sould a boy called Mats to Capt.
Coppendall for 10 _taies_.

And the China Capt. had 4 _mas_ wight Paraman gould at 14 per one in
plate, upon acco.

And I gave Mr. Jno. Hunt, master of the _Hozeander_, 2 Japon buck skins
and a peare silk stockings for a present, in respect he gave me a case
bottell.

There was a great eclips of the moone this night, began about 9 a
clock. But the wether proved overcast that we could not observe no
star, which we thought to have donne, to find out the true longetude of
this place.

_Febrary 23._--The China Capt. sent 2 barrilles _morofack_, 2 jarrs
biskit, and 2 barrilles pickeld tunny for a present to Capt. Jourden
for Bantam. I gave Jno. de Lievana 2½ Rs. of 8 in Spanish money, and
Françisco Carnero one riall of 8; and passed my word to pay a _tay_ in
Japon plate to Tome Dono for Jno. de Lievanas housrowme.

_Febrary 24._--I delivered twenty and five _tais_ plate bars to Mr.
Osterwick, to pay twenty _tais_ to Yayemon Dono and Tayamon Dono,
the two carpenters, geven ten _tais_ a peece for a present for payns
extraordnary about shipp.

The great Holland shipp, called the _Ankewsen_, went out to sea this
day, and the junk in compa. with her.

And I went with Capt. Coppendall to Hollandes howse to offer Capt.
Speck to carry his letters to Bantam, as their shipp did ours, shee
being ready to put to sea to morrow; but fownd Capt. Speck was gon out
with shipp.

Jacob Swager brought Capt. Coppendall a bottell of wyne and a cheese
for a present.

Divers Shashmas came to see the English howse, whome I used kindly.
They said the King of Shashma ment to goe to the Emperour the next
moneth.

Capt. Speck sent word to desire us to carry 6 Japon marreners along in
our shipp for Bantam that were left behind out of their junck.

_Febrary 25._--I sealed up my packet letters for England, viz.:--

  1 to the Wor. Company  }
  1 to Ser Thomas Smith  } all enclozed to Worll. Compa.,
  1 to Mr. Edward James  }  with 1 from Mr. Eaton.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Saris  }
  1 to my brother Walter }

And in that packet the letters[129] which went per junck per way of
Syam the last yeare both to my Lo. Treasurer, the Worll. Compa., Mr.
Wilson, Capt. Saris, and others; as also the ballance of the books.

More, I wrot letters for Bantam as followeth, viz.:--

2 to Capt. Jourden, with journall ballance and 4 books petty charges,
all in a box left open, delivered to Capt. Coppendall; with a packet
containing 2 pere silk stockinges, 2 bandes, and 1 per cuffes.

1 to Mr. Ric. Westby, with a Japon standish.

1 to Jno. Beamont, with a Japon standish and a peare clamps.

1 to Piter Turner, with a jar biskit.

1 to Francis Sewall, with a jar biskit.

1 to Harnando Ximenes, with a pere silk stockings.

All which matters I delivered to Capt. Coppendall, and went with hym
abord shipp to Cochi and carid as followeth:

To Mr. Jno. Hunt, master, a bag bisket containing 55 _cattes_, and a
box marma[lade].

To Mr. Dorington and Mr. Carpenter his mate, 1 bag biskit containing
50 _cat._

To shipps company, 3 barrilles wyne and 4 hoggs.

The China Capt. acoompanid us abord. We had 1 pec. ordinance at entry,
6 pec. for healths, and 5 at going away. Capt. Speck brought a letter
to deliver to Duch president at Bantam.

_Febrary 26._--I wrot a letter to Pattania to Mr. Adam Denton, and
Bent it per small Duch yaught, with a jar biskit and a letter to Mr.
Gurney, Syam.

A slave of the Admeralls did run away and gott secretly abord our
shipp; of the which I advised Capt. Coppendall. So, when they had waid
ancor and were under seale, they came to an ancor againe and sent hym
back per shipps boate. Soe, after midnight, wind vering northerly,
they set seale. God send them a good voyage.

The chirurgion of the _Hozeander_ used speeches that Mr. Nealson had
not geven hym satisfaction for paines he had taken with hym in his
sicknes, and to that effect got Capt. Coppendall to write me a letter,
and sent a note per Mr. Wickham of _dares_ and _tomares_.[130] Soe, at
the same instant, Mr. Nealson sent all the chirurgions _dares_ back to
hym, with a note of what he had geven hym. The chirurgion is a prating
fello, and I think sett on per others.

_Hozeander_ put to sea at midnight.

_Febrary 27._--I had conference with the carpenters to build a new
gadonge per water side, which, according to the note they put in, will
cost for tymber and other stuffe, besides workmanshipp, 681 _tais_.

And Oyen Dono and Soyemon Dono sent in plate of bars upon the kinges
acco. 519 : 2 : 3½, and upon acco. of China Capt., Andrea Dittis, 28 :
3 : 0.

_Febrary 28._--The Duch or Holland _pataga_[131] went out in the after
nowne toward Pattania.

The China Capt. feasted all the neighbours, in respect building his
new howse.

I had conference againe with carpenters about building the gadong,
which, as they noted before, the very

                                                  _ta. ma. co._
  Tymber and other stuffe would cost               681  0  0
  And 2530 carpenters dais work at 1½ _mas_ day    379  5  0
  And 2750 laborers daies work at 5 _cond._ day    137  5  0
  And 0200 plasterrars days work at                040  0  0

  Som totall amontes unto                          1238  0  0


Soe, per advice and counsell of all, it is thought fit to let the
gedong building rest till the next yeare, and only repare that on the
other side.

_Febrary 29._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton that news is com that wars
is lyke to ensue betwixt the Empror and his sonne Calsa Samme, being
backt per his father in law Massamone Dono, because the Emprour will
not geve his sonne the fortresse and teretory of Osakay, yf it were
gotten, as he promised he wold doe. I advised hym, yf wars were lyke
to ensue, that he should com away and bring money, and put the rest
into money yf it were possible.

Bongo Samme, _alius_ Nobesane, sent me a present of 10 hense and 2
_barsos_ wyne.

_Marche 1._--Delivered Mr. Nealson 50 _tais_ plate bars, paid unto
Capt. China and neighbors for parte of 90 _tais_ to make ston walles.
I delivered also two hundred and fyftie _taies_ plate bars to Andrea
Dittis, China Capt., wherof 200 _tais_ I adventure, viz. 100 _tais_ to
Liqueas, to buy amber greese, and the other 100 _tais_ into China, at
his discretion for my best advantage, and the other 50 _tais_ I lend
hym, to pay at his retorne from Langasaque.

I delivered the ten _tais_ plate bars to Capt. China which Capt.
Coppendall paid for the boy he sould hym, called Matts. And there was
two _tais_ small plate paid for a boy called Mon, to serve the Company
15 yeares, fynding him diet and aparell, the money paid his mother,
whoe gave a writing in Japons to that effect.

Mr. Osterwick paid Skydoyen Dono upon acco. for these goodes
following, viz.:--

                                         _ta. m. co._
    1 great mast for shipp                080 0  0
    2 yardes for shipp                    010 0  0
  106 bark lading stones for junck        010 6  0

    Som totall amontes unto               100 6  0


The which is paid as followeth:--

  In plate of bars of that of Capt. China      060 0  0
  Pro 131 _cattis_ peper, at 6 _tais pico_     007 8  6
  Pro 003 pec. chader bradry                   003 0  0

                                                70 8  6
  And now paid in ready money                   29 7  4

                                               100 6  0


Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, sent to borrow 50 or 60 _tais_ plate
for a frend, and I sent answer I had no money; yet he sent againe and
would have no na; but I was still of one minde.

_Marche 2._--We had 15 trees of a _bose_[132] to sett in our ochard,
viz., sypris, spruse, orange, lemon, chistnut, and other sortes flowres.

_Marche 3._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, went to Langasaque, and
I wrot a letter to his brother, Capt. Whaw, and sent hym a Holland
cheese, a bottell of sallet oyle, and a bag of wallnuts.

I delivered Oyen Dono the King of Fyrandos bill of 680 _tais_ for
gould, and he gave me a bill of his owne hand for 350 _tais_ plate
bars, due per King of Firando upon ould acco., beside the 3000 _tais_
last sould for. This bill of 350 _tais_ I delivered to Mr. Osterwick.

And I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton, to buy 10 or 15 _cakis_ and rest
in _shishero_ tables,[133] for the halfe our howst oweth of that was
burned in Osekay.

Mr. Eaton advised me that Sade Dono was dead, and that Osakay was on
fyre when he wrot the letter, and above 500 howses burned and the fyre
not quenched.

_Marche 4._--This day 5 carpenters to make orchard walle on the back
side of gedonge, and 2 laborers. And we planted the trees geven per
the _bose_ of Dushensh, being 17 trees, for doing whereof we had 5 of
the _boses_ men, whome we paid 6d. or 1 _mas_ per peece, with 14 other
laborers at 5 _condrins_ per peece, to carry and plant the same trees.

A _bose_ came to vizet me with a present of fans.

_Marche 6._--We sent a present to the bose that gave us the trees,
viz.: 1 barill wyne of 50 _gantes_, 10 _cattis_ pepper, with 2 small
bars plate.

_Marche 7._--The _bose_ sent 3 trees or plantes more, and came to thank
me for the present sent.

A Portingall called Gonsolva came to the English howse with
complementall wordes. I esteemed he came to spie or learne out whether
our shipp and the Duch yaught staid for to take the Amacon shipp.

_Marche 9._--I lent my book of St. Augustyn Citty of God to Mr.
Wickham, and the Turkish History and a book of forme of debitor and
creditor to Mr. Nealson.

I gave a fyne chint I bought of Water Carwarden to woman, Mr. Wickhams
gerle.

_Marche 10._--Mr. Nealson went to the bathes at Ishew, fynding hymselfe
ill at ease. And Mr. Wickham went for Miaco, to take acco. of Mr.
Eaton, and he to retorne for Firando, as apereth per coppies. And I
wrot a letter to Jor. Durois to buy som frute trees and send me, yf he
conveniently can; and sent this letter per Nico. Martyn.

Also we sent presents to Tonomon Samme, Nobese, Oyen Dono, Sugian Dono,
and his father Soyamon Dono, Gonosco Dono, Unagense Dono, with the
two sea _bongews_, is all 10 persons, each of them 2 _barsos_ wyne, 4
fishes, and a quantety of pepper.

_Marche 11._--Mr. Wickham departed not till this mornyng towardes
Miaco, and left woman his gerle behind hym, which he sayeth he bought
of yow[134] and that yow advised hym, in a letter of the 20th ultimo,
how her mother did think to bring yow in trouble for seling her. Which
is the occation I write yow now she is at Firando.

We had 21 _cakis_, or square postes, of Yasimon Dono at 1 mas pec., and
30 bundelles straw of Synemon Dono, cost 1{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} _mas_.

And I sent a verneson pastie to Mr. Eaton and an other the China Capten.

_Marche 12._--The night past Andrea Dittis retorned from Langasaque,
and brought me a letter from Capt. Whaw, his brother, whoe sent me a
jarr of oranges, with a littell fysh-pond (or jarr) with live fish in
it, and bought 15 pigions for me, cost 1 _tay_ 5 _condrins_.

Also the master workman plasterrer came along with hym to repare our
new bought gadong.

And upon hope of trade into China I lent Capt. Whaw, the China Capt. at
Langasaque, 500 _taies_, I say five hundred _tais_ in plate of bars.

And I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham, and sent hym the halfe of sealing
wax which Jorge Durois sent me, and advised hym my mynd it had byn
better he had carid his gerle woman along with hym.

And we made prise for tymber with Skidayon Dono, and paid hym 50 _tais_
plate bars in hand, as followeth:--

                                                        _ta.  m.  co._
  0450 _cakis_ of 2 _tatta._ long, at 1 _mas_ peec.      045  0    0
  0550 _nukis_ of 2 _tatta._ _isonuque_, 3 per a _mas_   018  3    1
  0040 _ficamons_ of 1½ _tatta._, of 1½ _mas_ pec.       006  0    0
  1000 ordinary bordes of 1 _tatta._, of 6 per a _mas_   016  6    4
  0070 other boardes of 1½ _tatta._, at 1 _mas_ pec.     007  0    0
  0035 _isonuque_ of 2 _tatta._, at 2 _mas_ pec.         007  0    0
  0040 _nandange_ of 1½ _tatta._, of 4½ per _mas_        000  9    0
  0150 _marraque_ of 2 _tatta._, at 3 per a _mas_        005  0    0
  0003 _monfashta_ of 1½ _tatta._, cost all 3            001  0    0
  0015 _tambu_ of 2 _tatta._, at cost all 15             003  0    0
  0002 _ficaye fashta_ of 2 _tatta._, cost both          000  5    0
  0020 _cakina ita_ of 4 _tatta._, at 9 _mas_ pec.       018  0    0

                                                         128  3    5


The tymber to be all delivered in Firando the next moone.

And ther wer 2 presentes geven to Joco Conde Dono and Ushanusque Dono,
each 2 _barsos_ wyne and 4 fishes, with a littell pepper.

And the China Capt. envited hym selfe to our _fro_.

And I forgot to note downe that this day a man was cut in peeces,
whoe had layne in prison 3 yeares, for runing away with his wife and
2 daughters to Faccatay, they being slaves to the king of this place
(of Firando), he writing to the king of Faccata to retorne them, which
he did. It is said that the begyning proceaded for that the king of
this place would have had the use of his eldest daughter. They being
Christians rather choose to run away, which cost the father his lyfe,
and yet the daughter, etc. And yt is said the wife, hearing her husband
is executed, is secretly fled, or, as som think, hath made her selfe
away. Word was sent to me to the English howse that, yf such a woman
were com to me, I should retorne her back.

_Marche 13._--The mans wife, whose husband was executed yisterday and
shee fled, was fownd dead this mornyng, she haveing hanged her selfe
upon a tree.

_Marche 14._--I gave Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., 2 letters
testimoniall (or of favor) in the names of Capt. Gotad and Roquan, to
goe into China, yf in case they met with English shiping.

There was 378½ _cattis_ sea weed bought this day, at 7½ _mas_ per
_pico_.

And Joco Conde Dono sent me a present of 3 hanches salt veneson, with
certen shelfish called _woby_.

Matinga had 5 bales rise of 6 _gantes_ per _mas_, for which I answered.

_Marche 15._--Genta Samme, the kinges yongest brother, the adopted
sonne of Bongo Samme, sent to buy 3 or 4 peeces stuffes, he being bownd
to lye at the Emperours Court; which, in respect ther was never nothing
geven unto hym before and he going to lye at Cort, was geven hym for a
present.

And Bongo Sama envited Mr. Osterwick and my selfe to dyner to morrow,
as he hath donne the lyke to the Hollanders.

There went divers pilgrams to Tencha dire with an _ammabush_[135] for
their gide, the pilgrams haveinge letters written on the backs of their
_keremons_ (or coates).

_Marche 16._--We went to dynner to Bongo Sammes, Mr. Osterwick and my
selfe, where we met Capt. Speck with an other Duchman and a _boz_. We
had very good cheare. And Genta Samme, the kinges yongest brother,
came in at later end, and thanked me for the present geven hym the day
before, and tould me he was going up to the Court (after his brother)
to the Emperour, unto whome I desired hym to offer my service and
that I made acco. to vizet them before it were longe, God sending our
shipping to arive in saffetie.

_Marche 18._--We bought two fig trees, an orenge tree, and a peche
tree, cost all 1 _tay_, and 2 other oring trees; and had an oring tree,
a quince tree, and a peare tree geven.

_Marche 20._--Capt. Speck sent me 2 Portingale figg trees.

_Marche 21._--We receved 1000 tiles of all sortes to tile the new
porche, with 2 head tiles.

_Marche 22._--I sent a letter to Mr. Nealson, per Jacob Swager, for
the bathes of Ishew, he goeing to buy cattell of Bungo Samme, the king
having geven them an iland to feed them on.

_Marche 23._--The China Capt. came back from Langasaque and brought me
2 China stooles for a present, and a baskit of greate orranges.

And I receved a letter from Jorge Durois, with 3 quince trees, 5 figg
slipps, an orange tree, and a peare tree, with som garden seeds. His
letter was dated in Langasaque, le 25th of March, new stile. Also I
receved an other letter from Capt. Garrocho, with certen rowles of
ruske.

The great shipp of Amacan put to sea on Sonday last.

_Marche 24._--Niquan, the China Capt. kynsman, departed towardes
China 7 daies past from Langasaque; from whence he sent me a peece of
rofesate red velvet for a present, and desired me to lend his wife 20
_taies_ in his abcense to buy her provition, for which he would be
accomptable at his retorne, and Andrea Dittis his shewrty for repament.

_Marche 25._--We had greate canes of the China Capt. to make an arbor
or shed for a vyne; and 6 rayles or _nuquis_ at 12 _condrins_. And a
_bose_, frend to Capt. China, sent me 3 or 4 trees, 1 of peches and the
rest of flowres.

_Marche 26._--Ushenusque Dono gave me a greate vine tree, which I
planted in our new orchard on the west side our gadong.

And a cavelero of Tabilo sent the China Capt. an oring tree, a pear
tree, and 2 peche trees, with other flowers, which he gave all to me
to plant in our new orchard.

News came to Firando that the King of Shashma would passe this way som
3 or 4 daies hence.

_Marche 28._--All the kayes of our howse dores, being 6, were stolne,
and one of them sould in truck of rise, which coming to my knowledg,
I laid hould on hym which bought it to bring forth the partie which
sould it, and kept hym prisoner in our English howse all night, but
could get nothing of hym. Soe, upon the word of the China Capt. with 2
other neighbours, I let hym goe free upon his promis to looke out for
the partie which sould it. And soe we sett up a bill in writing, that I
would geve a bar of plate to hym which brought the kayes.

We had but 3 oryng trees from Sugien Dono, the[y] bing so great the
bark could bring no more.

_Marche 29._--About nowne the King of Shashma passed by Firando and
came to an ancor a league from Firando; whither I went to vizet hym,
being accompanid with Mr. Osterwick, and carid a present of 2 barilles
wyne, 2 bundells fysh, and 2 damaskt fowling peeces.

And at our coming to the roade where he staid at an anchor, we fownd
Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, with Bongo Samme his uncle, ready
to present the King of Shashma with a present, as also Capt. Speck was
ready to doe the lyke for the Hollanders, having 3 other merchants to
accompany hym. But Tonomon Samme willed us both to stay till they had
byn first with hym, and sent me word I should com next after; yet the
Duch pressed forward by meanes of Zanzabars brother in law, and stept
into the bark before me. But at his retorne I tould hym, that all might
heare me, that he knew well my place and ranke was to have gon before
hym, and caused our _jurebasso_ to signefie as much to the King of
Shashma, and that the King of England had vassales much greater then
the prince (or county) which governed the Hollanders, and that their
state or government was under the comand of the King of England, he
haveing garrisons of English souldiers in their cheefest fortres or
places of strength they had. In fine, the King of Shashma took notis
of my speeches, and sowne after sent a great lord unto me to thank me
both for this present as also for the other the yeare past, and withall
sent me 10 bars of silver waying 43 _tais_, and the lyk som, as I
understand, was sent from hym to the Duch, after they had byn with us.

But I forgot to note dowing (_sic_) the present geven by the Duch,
viz.:--

  1 greate gilded looking glasse.
  1 or 2 _tattamis_ stamet cloth   } very good cullers.
  1 or 2 _tattamis_ stamet kersies }

I know not well whether the cloth as I sayd was 2 _tattamis_ in a peece
or 1 _tattamy_. They presented allso divers peeces of China stuffs, but
I think they were for his followers, for they put up a petission to the
king (as I think) to have trade into his cuntrey, but, as I understand,
were put offe till his retorne. As also I deliverd hym the Emperours
letter, procured formerly, to have trad into all his dominions; but he
gave me no answer, but sent me word by hym which brought the present
that, at his retorne from the Emperours Court, he would com and vizet
our English howse and geve me answer to content.

A frend of the China Capt. sent me 2 orange trees and a peach tree from
Tabola, I sending a bark and men to fetch them.

Pedro the porter entertayned at a _tay_ per month.

_Marche 30._--I sent Goresano, our _jurebasso_, to a cavelero which
accompanid the lord of Shashma yisterday, when he came to the English
howse with the present, to thank hym for his paynes, and that I did not
expect any present at all, yet, it being sent from so greate a prince
as the King of Shashma was, I could not refuse the receaving therof.
He retorned me answer that it was not for the vallu of the mony that
the king sent it, but only as a token of good will, according to the
Japon custom, and that I might be ashewred, yf we had a mynd to trade
into Shashma, that we should be welcom and find that greate man ready
to further us in what he might for the good entertaynment he had at our
English howse yisterday.

And there was a barr more of Oban gould of fifty-five _taies_ lent to
Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., to send to his brother Whaw, to geve to
the sonne of Twan Dono.

Our neighbours envited them selves to dyner to morow, it being our
Easterday, I meane the 10 of the two wardes and princepall men.

_Marche 31._--Easterday. Our neighbours came to dyner, 24 persons.

There was reportes geven out the Emperour is dead, and that Frushma,
or Tushma Tay, a great lord or prince in the north, is slayne per the
Emperours people, coming from Edo to Mico; but I esteeme this ordenary
Japon newes, which prove lyes. Also they report the King of Shashma
taketh this voyag to reveng Frushma Tais death.

_Aprill 1._--I receved a letter from Mr. Wickham, dated in Osakay the
22th ultimo, wherin he adviseth me the tymber and neales is provided,
and that the tymber will be put abord a bark of Fingo to morow, fraight
10 _taies_. Also he reportes of news, but so variable that it was not
worth writing of. And I wrot an other letter to Jorge Durois to buy
2 or 3 jarrs conserve, all that was left being geven to the King of
Shashma, and Tonomon Samme, Sangero Samme, and Soyemon Dono sending
after to me to have had som for the said king. This letter I sent per
Antonio, the kinges caffro.

_Aprill 3._--The King of Shashma went out of harbour at Fyrando this
mornyng. And Sugian Dono sent me a fyne tree of flowers to plant in
our garden.

_Aprill 4._--The wyfe of a fellow, which hath stolne 17 mas of the
themperours plate and is run away, is seazed upon with her sonne and
servantes and all she hath, and were to have byn put into prison. Soe
her frendes came to me and Andrea Dittis to speake to the justis for
her, which we did. Soe they staid her from going into prison, and take
councell what is to be donne therein.

_Aprill 7._--Tonomon Samme, understanding of my golden fish, sent to
desire to have it; so I gave it hym, and he gave me a great black dogg.
He desired to have a littell pepper and som cloves, which was also sent
hym, som 2 _cattis_ pepper and a few cloves.

_Aprill 10._--The China Capt. gave me a peece crisped white silke, lyke
sipers.[136] Mr. Osterwick said he bought the lyke at Bantam for 2 Rs.
of 8.

_Aprill 11._--The China Capt. went a pilgremage to a pagod neare Goto,
for a voy (_sic_) he made for recovering of his brother Whaws health.

_Aprill 12._--I receved a letter from Jorge Durois, with 36 tallo
candells, per our _jurebassos_ wife, but she retorned without geting
her father set at liberty, Twan not being willing to despense with hym.

Mr. Nealson, Mr. Osterwick, and my selfe went to dyner to Oyen Donos
this day, and were well entertayned, and amongst other speeches we
had conferrence of the Hollanders presuminge to have entrance to the
King of Shashma before us, and of my reproving Capt. Speck for it,
etc. But all took it rather for a reproofe to the Duch then otherwais,
in respeck the King of England keepeth garnison in the princepall
fortresses they have, at his charge. The Hollanders can not deny yt.

There came 2 Spaniardes from Edo this day, and tould me it is comenly
reported above that the Emperour is dead, and that they met the King of
Figen going to Shrongo with greate forcese. So they esteeme there will
be warrs above. They said they thought Mr. Wickham and Mr. Eaton were
providing to com to Firando with such matters as they have resting,
standing in dowbt what might ensue.

The China Capt. retorned from his pilgremage.

_Aprill 13._--Pasquall the Spaniard made enquiry which of the English
in Firando was Mr. Wickhams kinsman, and in the end it proved to be
Mr. Osterwick, unto whome he sent _recoudo_[137] that he had sould 2½,
I say two _cattis_ and a halfe of exellent white amber greece at one
hundred _taies_ the _catty_, and gave Mr. Osterwick order to receve the
payment; as also he sent an other _catty_ of the lyke to Capt. Jourden
to Bantam per Capt. Copindall, refusing to sell it heare to me for
the Companies use at twenty _taies_, haveing secretly emploid others
before to have sould it for a greater price, but could not. Thus now am
I not deceaved in hym, that I imagened he had made an India voyag in
the Liqueas, having fingered 4 or 5 _cattis_ of exellent amber greece,
which made hym to stand upon his puntos to have gon away in som Japon
junck or Holland ship for Pattania or Bantam. Yet let both hym and the
world judg of me yf I dealt frendly with hym (I meane Mr. Wickham),
when I let hym put to acco. what he would, and yet, over and above,
lent hym one hundred and fiftie rialls of eight to make benefite of,
and gave hym as much with it of my owne to doe as a frend, yf occation
were offred. But he retorned me my money as I delivered it, and emploid
all his owne, _ut supra_.

Capt. Speck came to vizet me, and amongst other matters I tould hym
I marveled he thrust hym selfe forward to have entrance to the King
of Shashma before my selfe. His answer was, he knew no reason to the
contray, and that in these partes he took the Grave Moris and the
Estates of Holland to be as much as the King of England, yf not more.

The China Capt. envited Mr. Nelson, Mr. Osterwick and my selfe to
supper amonst many Japons.

_Aprill 14._--I receved a letter from Mr. Eaton, dated in Osakay, le
24th of Marche, sent per a bark of Figen with tymber, viz.:--

  _Buanuqo_, or boardes, 1200, in 100 bundells of 12, cost   03 0 0
  _Sugingeta_, or rayles, 0500, at 27 _mas_ per 100, is      13 5 0
  _Beauff_, or rayles, 0300, at 2½ _condrin_ per peece       07 5 0
  _Shishero_, or boardes, 0040, at 58 _condr_. peece is      23 2 0
  _Tacca nuca_, or spars, 0015, at 6 _mas_ peece is          09 0 0
  _Sugeta_, or boardes, 0100, at 13 _condr_. 10 boardes      07 3 0

  Som totall boardes and tymber cost                         63 5 0
  More for boate hier carrying all aboard                    00 5 0

                                                             64 0 0


Tonoman Samme sent me 2 hanches venison for a present; and I sent hym
2 English knyves and a quarter of a Hollands cheese, he sending after
to buy som.

_Aprill 15._--The _boz_ or pagan prist above sent me a tree of white
flowers for a present.

_Aprill 16._--We sent a boate to Langasaque, to buy 400 Shashma boardes
to cover the endes of our gadong.

Our new wall of the north side, made per our neighbours, shronk soe it
was this day broaken up agane, or rather puld downe.

_Aprill 17._--News was sent me by Oyen Donos sonne that the Emperour
had geven the King of Firando leave to retorne to his contrey, and
that they thought he would be heare within this 10 dayes.

And at same tyme the King of Crates man came to vizet me, and said
it was reported that the Emperour was very sick with a fall he had
from his horce in going a hawlking, so that no man might speake with
hym. Yet, notwithstanding, Shungo Samma had geven leave to the King
of Faccata and the King of Figen to retorne for their countries, but
comanded all the rest to stay his ferther plesure.

And towardes night a cavelero sent me word how it was trew that the
Emperour was alive, and had spoaken to the King of Firando and two
other princes only, of purpose to stop the mowthes of those which
reported hym to be dead; only it seemed to them he was not halfe well.

_Aprill 18._--We receved 660 tiles, viz. 360 for gadong walle and 300
tiling flat tiles.

And I receved an other letter from Jo. Durois, dated in Langasaque, le
24th of Aprill, new stile, wherin he advized me how the speeche went
that Shashma Dono was building the fortres at Osakay and Frushma Tay
with hym.

Also Soyemon Dono sent me a letter how they could not sell the
merchandize, viz. the white baftas they tooke for the King of Firando.
Soe he willed me to take them back againe. Unto which letter I retorned
answer, I could not doe it in respeckt I had advized the Company into
England of the sale thereof, as also the lyke to the agent at Bantam.

Gonosque Dono sent me 2 hanches of venison for a present. We receved 34
rownd postes of Skidayen, called _yofen nuquy_. Skiamon Dono came from
Langasaque and sent me a present of confittes and craknills.

_Aprill 19._--The 2 sea _bongews_ came to vizet me, and amongst other
matters we had speeches tuching Capt. Specks goinge before me to salute
the King of Shashma, and of my reproveing hym for it, wherin they said
I had reason and that they knew it not till now.

_Aprill 20._--Mr. Eaton arived from Osakay with a Spaniard in his
company, pilot of the ship which came from Nova Spania. Mr. Eaton
brought me 2 letters from Mr. Wickham, dated in Miaco the 4th and 6th
currant, in which he wrot me something humerously, both about the
busynes as also about my misusing of his gerle woman, which is untrewe.
Also I receved a letter from Ric. Hudson, with 2 others, 1 from Capt.
Adames sonne, and the other from our hostes at Miaco and Osakay, he of
Miaco sending me 2 pewter basons for a present, and the other of Osakay
10 pewter pottage dishes.

And we receved tymber of Skidayen Dono, viz.:--

  79 _cakis mates nuque_ of 2 _tattamy_ long.
  20 _cakis tabu nuque_ of 2 _tattamis_ long.
  45 _nendangi_, or rownd poles, of 2½ _tatt._

Mr. Nealson in a pot humor fell out with Antony the kinges caffro, and
struk hym in my sight.

_Aprill 21._--I bought a duble silver and gilt salt containing 13 R. {~VULGAR FRACTION ONE EIGHTH~}
R. of 8, for same wight Spanish money.

_Aprill 22._--I delivered 5 ould gould ringes of Matingas to the
gouldsmith, to make new.

And Mr. Eaton gave me 5 Japon beakers, 4 pottage dishes, 8 other Japon
dishes, and a wassell bole.

_Aprill 23._--We receved tymber of Skidayon Dono, viz.:--

  297 _nuquis_, or rayles.
  017 _fashack_, or rownd poles.
  070 inche bordes, _fashock ison_.
  030 _cakis_, or square posts, of 2 _tatta_.

Receved in 1 boate 700 howse tiles, and in an other 700 tiles more,
viz. 450 howse tiles and 250 flat for godong.

_Aprill 24._--We bought 40 rownd poles, cost 2 _mas_, littell ones to
cover carpenters shed. Tome Dono lent us 20 mats or _tomas_, and the
China Capt. lent us 6 bundells of small canes to cover carpenters shed.
And 40 mats bought of 2 others per Gorezano.

_Aprill 25._--We borowed 200 _tomas_, or straw matts, of Sifian Dono,
of 20 per _mas_.

_Aprill 26._--I wrot a letter to Figean a Camme, King of Firando,
complementally, that I was glad to understand of his safe arivall at
Shrongo and kind entertaynment of themperour; and that yf any shiping
arived heare from England or our junck from Syam, that I would adviz
hym thereof. This letter I sent per conveance of Oyen Dono.

And I reconed with Gorezano, our _jurebasso_, for monies he disbursed
for me, as followeth:--

                                                  _ta. m. co._

  Pro a kettell, or furnes for Matinga              0  6   5
  Pro a peece taffety to lyne Domingos _kerymon_    1  2   6½
  Pro a barill wyne for Matinga                     1  1   2
  Pro gerdell for Matinga, 2 fruntes                1  0   0
  Pro cotten woll for Jeffres _kerremon_            0  1   5
  Pro a pere shews for Carnero, porter              0  3   0
  Pro fishing lyne for my selfe                     0  1   0
  Pro a blind man that songe                        0  1   0
  Pro dressing me 2 ould hattes                     0  4   0
  Pro a _kitesoll_ for my selfe                     0  2   0
  Pro a _cattan_ for Domingo                        0  8   0

                                                    6   0  8½

_Aprill 28._--We receved 3 square post for the water gate, 1 plank for
the bridg, and 7 small _ficamons_ servisable.

_Aprill 29._--I reconed with Yoskey for monies laid out for me, viz.:--

  To shewmaker for making buskins and 2 per shewsfor my selfe  00 4 0
  To Matinga, 1 peare _tabis_                                  00 2 6
  To pint tugger                                               00 5 0

_Aprill 30._--Mr. Wickham writ he delivered 25 _tat._ broad cloth to
the King of Firandos man. Also of the lying news of Fidaia Sammes being
alive, and that 200 Japons are put to death at Osakay for selling
people after the wars, and that Micarna Camme Samme, the Emperours
sonns sonne, bought a _caboke_, or player, cost hym 10000 _taies_, is
2500 li. sterling.

_May 2._--We reared the frame under the north side of our howse this
day.

Zanzabar, _allius_ Yasimon Dono, envited us all to dyner this day and
used us kyndly.

_May 3._--We receved in 2 barkes foure thousand six hundred tils,
wherof 50 were for gadong walle.

_May 4._--We receved a bark; lading ston. Cushcron Dono.

_May 5._--The sonne of Tuan Dono of Langasaque departed to sea with 13
barkes laden with souldiers to take the iland Taccasange, called per
them soe, but by us Isla Fermosa. And it is reported he is at Goto,
staying for more succors which are to com from Miaco, and thought they
mean to goe for Lequea, to look for Fidaia Samme.

Peter, our new porter, and Miguell, Corean _jurebasso_, went about to
have gotten a Japon servant to the Jesuistes to have served in our
English howse, which I refused to doe; but Peter let hym lodg one night
in the howse, which Gorezano tould me of, which both the other took
soe in snuffe that they thretned to kill Gorezano. Soe I turned Piter
out a dores. Which Miguell, in his usuall drunken humor, stomocked
and entered into termes with me that I had no reason to doe it; soe I
turned hym out lykewaies to beare the other company.

_May 8._--I delivered one hundred _tais_ plate bars to Mr. Osterwick,
wherof he delivered 50 _tais_ lyke to Mr. Eaton to goe to Ikanoura to
buy tymber, because Skidayen Dono deceaveth us.

The perticulars of tymber is as followeth, viz.:--

  250 _cakis_, or squar post.
  250 _nukis_, or rayles.
  800 small boardes.
  004 _mombashta_, or dore postes.
  100 rownd postes.

_May 10._--We had 2 barkes lading flat stones of Tome Dono and Cushcron
Dono, to pave yard.

_May 14._--Unagense Dono sent me a present of halfe a wild bore.

_May 15._--I wrot 3 letters to Mr. Eaton, China Capt., and Jor. Durois,
advising Mr. Eaton to com away with what tymber he had bought and buy
no more, but bring 3 or 400 bags lyme. And sent these letters per Skeyo
that was our skullion.

_May 16._--I receved three hundred and fyftie _taies_ plate of bars of
Oyen Dono, in full payment for the ould debt due per King of Firando,
besides or above the 3000 _taies_ due per hym last. I say the King of
Firando oweth 3000 _tais_ over and above this 350 _tais_ now paid;
which three hundred and fyftie _taies_ Mr. Osterwick receaved.

Also Mr. Eaton fell out with a Japon of Figen, whoe misused and struck
hym with a staff and knockt hym downe, thinking to have kild hym,
for spite he bought tymber at a hier rate then he. But Mr. Eaton, in
defence of hym selfe, hath dangerously wounded the other. But the
Umbrians took Mr. Eatons parte, other wais they Figians had murthered
hym. Soe he stands on his gard till I send to cleare hym, the Umbrians
protecting hym.

The China Capt. retorned from Langasaque, and brought me word how
Mr. Eaton was abused by them of Fingo, and that it was a marvell he
escaped with life. So, per his counsell, I sent a bark with 4 ores to
cary a letter to Mr. Eaton, and withall sent an other in Japons to the
_dico_ of Ykanaura, desyring hym to have a care that no violence were
offred to the scrivano, _allius_ Mr. Eaton, for that to morrow I ment
to send a letter to the King of Umbra, his master, to have hym set at
liberty and retorned to me, as our priveleges geven per the Emperour
spesefied, as the King of Firandos man could testefie, whoe I ment to
send Mr. Nealson along with in the mornyng about same matter. And so I
gott Jubio Dono of Crates to write me a letter to the King of Umbra _ut
supra_.

Capt. Whaw, the China Capt. brother, did send me a present of vallance
for a bed, embradered.

_May 17._--I sent Mr. Nelson to Umbra with the letter written to the
king, and he carid 50 _tais_ in plate bars and 10 _tais_ in small plate
with hym.

The China Capt. lent us leafe gould to gild one mark and 2 head tiles.

_May 18._--There came a man from Umbra about the quarrell of the
Fingonians with Mr. Eaton, saying they swagered mightely because they
thought the man would dye.

_May 19._--I receved a letter from Mr. Nealson at Fooky,[138] 3 leages
hence, being staid per contrary wind, but departed from thence this
mornyng before day. Also the small bark I sent to Mr. Eaton with a
letter retorned, and tells me the man which he hurt is in no danger
of death; yet, not withstanding, they of Umbra will suffer no man to
speake to hym, not so much as hym which carid hym my letter, nor a
Spaniard which came to hym from Langasaque with a present. I think it
is the saturnecall humor of the ould kyng, because he is a Christian,
he being a mortall enemy to that name for hatred of the Jesuistes.

And, after we were gon to bed, Tonomon Samme, the Kinges brother, sent
me word that he ment to send an expres to the King of Fingo, and that
yf I would write he should carry my letter. I retorned hym word that I
knew not what to write to Fyngo till I knew the certenty of what passed
in Umbra, which will be when Mr. Eaton and Mr. Nealson (which went for
hym) retorned.

_May 20._--I went to Soyemon Dono to tell hym I marveled them of Umbra
used the scrivano (_alius_ Mr. Wm. Eaton) soe hardly that they would
suffer no man to speake with hym nor let hym have victuelles for money.
He answered me that the Umbrians kept such ward about hym for his good,
because the Fingonians, being above 150 persons, had mad bragges they
would kill hym, and, Ikanoura being a littell towne or village, were
afeard of the worst, and so kept ward; but that they skanted hym of
victuells he marveled, but he was assured it was not of mallice, but
knew the place was bare of provition, and that I might rest assured
that, when the _bungew_ with Mr. Nealson were arived, that Mr. Eaton
should presently be set at liberty; and in the meane tyme I must have
pasience, for their trowble was much more then ours. He also tould me
that yf I would write Mr. Eaton or Mr. Nealson, that he ment to send a
man expres to Umbra this day. Soe I wrot them both, and sent them per a
man sent from Firando of purpose per kinges brother.

We reared the building to the southward of our howse in Firando this
day.

_May 21._--I wrot a letter to Jor. Durois, and ther inclozed the other
I thought to have sent per Skeyo, kept till now per meane of contrary
wynds, in which letter I advized hym of the trowbls of Mr. Eaton at
Ikanaura in Umbra; sent per servant Bugo Same.

And after, we recd. in 2 barkes 1400 tils. Also we had 3 barkes lading
ston, viz. 1 of Tome Dono, 1 of Cushcron Dono, 1 of Synemon Dono. And
we had 35 bundells canes of the China Capt.

And towardes night I receved a letter from Mr. Nealson, dated in the
gulfe of Umbra le 20th currant, and sent per the _bongew_ which went
along with hym, whoe now retorned back, with many complements from them
of Umbra, but determen not to set Mr. Eaton at liberty till they had
enformed the _Tono_ of Fingo therof.

Mr. Nelson went to Ikanora to vizet Mr. Eaton and furnish hym with such
matters as he stood in need of, understanding the Umbrians kept hym soe
short.

Yosky the butler, being sick, asked lycense to goe to his howse to take
phisick.

_May 23._--Migell, our _jurebasso_, desired lycense to goe take
phisick, being very ill at ease.

_May 24._--We had fliing news how our ship the _Hozeander_ with the
Hollanders have met with the great Portingall ship of Amacan, and
fought with her neare to the Liqueas, and som escaping out of her
ashore retorned per way of Xaxma to Langasaque with news, but know not
the end of the fight, whether she escaped or no. Of the which I advised
Jor. Durois per Skeyo or his cafero in a letter; but I esteem it
ordenary Japon news, which are lyes, dowbting (according to the English
proverb) that it is to good to be true, yet, according to an other, I
wish that there never com worse news to the towne.

Migell our _jurebassos_ wife came and brought me a small jarr of
_achar_[139] for a present, desyring me to exskews her husband in that
he abcented hym selfe to take phisik in this tyme of busynes.

And after I was gon to bed, Soyemon Dono sent to have a _jurebasso_ to
com to hym about news they had from Ikanoura. Soe I went my selfe unto
hym, and he tould me that the King of Fingo had sent a letter to Umbra,
wherin he advised that, allthough the English had kild a man of his, he
made no reconyng of it, only he was advised that som of Firando that
was in company of the English had stolne somthing wherby this quarrell
grew. This was the matter he sent to tell me of, and that to morrow
they ment to send a man expres to Ikanoura about this matter. So I
desyred hym he might carry me a letter to Mr. Nealson.

_May_ 25.--Mr. Nealson retorned from Ikanaura, but Mr. Eaton staid
behind till the _bongew_ retorned from Fingo.

The man Mr. Eaton hurt dyed the other night, whereupon they sent for
Co John, Mr. Eatons boy, and cut afe his head, for that he began
the brute; and thought to have donne the lyke per Skite, because he
took Mr. Eatons part when they misused hym, and the lyk of Tome, his
_jurebasso_. All was about a peece of straw cord not worth a farthing.

And I receved 3 letters and a note from Mr. Eaton per Mr. Nealson,
dated the 23th and 24th curant, the note manifesting the tymber,
boardes, and lyme he had bought, viz.:--

                                                        _ta. m. co._
  250 _cakis_, at 13 _tais_ per _cnto_. is               32  5  0
  100 rownd postes, or _marakis_, 3 per _mas_.           03  3  0
  250 _nukis_, at 5 per _mas_                            05  0  0
  004 _mombashta_, or dore postes                        04  3  0

  This paid to _bongew_ at Ika                           45  1  0
  Also 400 saks lyme, at 3½ _condrin_                    14  0  0
  800 boardes, at 7 per _mas_                            11  4  0

                                                         70  5  0

Also he writes he receved 100 tallow candelles of Georg Durois at
Langasaque, whereof he burned 23 in prison and Mr. Nealson 5 per way.
So Mr. Nelson brought 72 to Firando.

_May 29._--I entred into cowncell with Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick,
whether it were best to send Mr. Nealson back to Mr. Eaton with a
bark to bring hym away, yf he be set at lyberty at the retorne of the
_bongew_ from Fingo, as they promised he should. So it was concluded
upon, and, because I had ernest occation to use Gorezano in howse, I
got lycense of Capt. Speck to have a _jurebasso_ which served the Duch,
which he granted me. But when they were ready to depart, there came a
Japon and whispered our Duch _jurebasso_ in the eare, who presently
refuced to goe on our pretended affares. So I was forced to send
Gorezano againe with hym and a souldier of the kinges, whom Tonomon
Same, the kings brother, sent with them at my request. The pointes of
busynes tuching Mr. Nealsons proceading apeareth in a memoriall of this
date, the coppie wherof I kept. I wrot a letter per hym to Mr. Eaton.

And receved a letter from Jor. Durois, dated in Langasaque le 5th of
July, wherin he wrot me the news of the meeting of our English shipp
with that of Amacan was a lye, only the great ship toed a boate after
her, wherin were 2 horses with provition of meate for them and 4 or
5 persons to look unto them, but per stormy wether were broaken from
the shipp and cast on the cost of Xaxma, having passed much danger,
the bark being sunke, and 4 got upon a peece of tymber, living 5 days
without meate or drink. I say 8 got on it at first, wherof 4 dyed
before they got aland at Liquea.

_May 30._--Jubio Dono of Crates lent us 5 sackes new barly, of 51 small
_gantes_ per sack, till we could get other to malt.

_May 31._--We sould 10 fardelles rotten cuttelfish to our fishmonger
for 7 _tais_ 8 _mas_, to tak fish for howse in payment. This
cuttellfish was bought for first voyag of our junck to Syam, and, she
loosing her voyage, new put in place.

_June 2._--I receved a letter from Mr. Nealson, dated in Ikanoura le
last of May, signefying he staid the retorne of the _bongew_ from
Fingo, and that Mr. Eaton was better used now then heretofore, and that
the _bongew_ which used Mr. Eaton soe strictly is put of of his place
and lyke to loose his head for cuting affe our servantes head.

The Hollanders reared a new gadong this day, as bigg as their other,
and made an other thatcht one a mile ofe, to buld shiping and put
tymber in, and have mad other much building this yeare, planted 2
orchardes, and made a new key out of the sea.

_June 3._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Nealson, per the man which carid
the other, how I thought best he retorned, for that it is nothing but
delayes of the Umbrians who have sent to the Emperours court about the
matter, as I think, or, yf he stay upon good occation, then to send
back Gorezano.

I reconed with the teliers, and paid the fat tealor 5 _tais_ in small
plate for making me 5 new garmentes and sowing two ould gownes and a
satten dublet. And he paid me 2 _tais_ greate plate out of it for 2
peeces duttis sould hym.

Also I paid the China button maker 1 _tay_ 4 _mas_ for buttons, in
small plate.

  And I reconed with the leane telor, and paid hym for dyvers garmentes
  and mending ould, as apereth per particulars-- 7_ta._ 6_m._ 0_co._
  And for making 8 sutes for caffro              1_ta._ 8_m._ 0_co._
  And for sowing the flagg or making             0_ta._ 2_m._ 0_co._

_June 5._--I receved a letter from Figen a Camme, King of Firando,
dated in Shrongo 18 dais past, with 3 salmons for a present. Also he
writes me of the good entertaynment the Emperour gave hym, with lycense
to retorne to Firando when he pleaseth, and that the Empr. gave hym 18
_keremons_ or gowns, with 18 storkes or salted fowles, for a present, a
matter much esteemed in these partes.

Also I receved a complementall letter from Torayemon Dono, with another
inclosed for the China Capt. which I delivered presently. Torayemon
Dono advized of presentes geven the king.

And after dyner Mr. Nealson retorned from Ikanaura with Mr. Eaton
and the _bongew_ of Firando which went to Fingo, and Mr. Eatons host
of Langasaque who went to vizet hym at Ikanoura so sowne as he heard
he was in trowble, and hath kept hym company ever since, conveaying
a musket and other armes into prison to defend hym against them of
Fingo, yf they went about to offer violence, offring his person for his
defence till the death, yf need required.

The _bongew_ which went for Fingo retorned with answer to them of Umbra
that they should set the Englishman at liberty, for that he would
not medell with them, being under the Emperour his protection; and
that them of Fingo, which began this brute, went upon their affares
without knowledg to hym, and therefore he would not defend them in the
action. Yet, notwithstanding all this, they of Umbra would not deliver
Mr. Eaton in 2 dais after the news came, siting still in _dancons_
or councell about it, making delayes, keeping hym baricaded till the
last hower. And, although the other _bongew_ used Mr. Eaton kindlie at
first, and let Mr. Nealson goe and vizet hym, yet after he restrayned
hym and would not let hym speake with hym in 2 daies. Their hatred
against us (I meane them of Umbra) is per meanes of the padrese or
pristes, who stered them up against us to make us odious to the Japons,
for they are all, or the most part, papisticall Christians in Umbra,
and attribute a great (or cheefe) occation of banishment of them out
of Japon per meanes of the English, many papistes and Jesuistes lying
secretly lurking in most partes of Japon till this hower. Yet I hope
in tyme to use the lyke frenship to them as they have donne now to us.
And it is serten them of Umbra are enemies to them of Firando, for that
Foyne Samme recovered from them much land which they had taken from
Doca Samme his father, and added much of Umbra unto it, which they of
Firando pocesse till this day.

_June 6._--I receved a letter from Mr. Wickham, dated in Miaco le 22th
ultimo, with an other from Co. Jno. _jurebasso_, both per the _keremon_
sellar or mercer, with 2 barrill wyne, cost both 13 _mas_, with 2
_catabras_ for Matinga, 2 for his woman Femega, and 1 for Mr. Eatons
woman. He writes that the King of Xaxma with Frushma Tay and other
_tonos_ were com to Miaco, and all other permitted to retorne for their
cuntres.

_June 7._--Mr. Eatons host enformed me how he was in Cochinchina when
Mr. Peacock was kild, and that the King of Cochinchina knew nothing
thereof, and that he thought, yf we sought, we might have restitution
of all. He sayeth they were 5 men which murthered both the English and
Duch, wherof 2 were of Cochinchina, 2 Japons, and the other a China,
their names being as followeth: Mangosa Dono, Sanzo Dono, Japons;
Mangosa, Mr. Peacockes host; Hongo, a China; Uncam, _bongew_ of junk,
Amy, _bongew_ of bark, of Cochinchina.

I offred hym that, yf he would put me in suffitient sureties at
Langasaque to be answerable that he should render the Wor. Company a
just accompt of all he recovered or receaved, that then I would geve
hym power to follow the matter, and be bownd to geve hym satisfaction
for doing thereof to his owne content, and procure the Emperours letter
to the King of Cochinchina, yf need so required. So he gave me answer
he was content to put me in sureties to content. The present was geven
hym, as well in respect of the paines he hath taken with Mr. Eaton, as
also for hope we have to employ hym upon Cochinchina busines.

_June 8._--This day was a Japon feast, being the 5th day of ther 5th
month, called by them _Gunguach goriore_.

The China Capt. sent me 2 small _barsos_ of wine and 2 fishes for a
present this Japon feast, and the fatt China telior and buton maker
sent me 1 _barso_ and 2 fyshes. And I sent the China Capt. a salmon and
a phan.

I was enformed that the King of Firando spake not with the Emperour,
but only was permitted to enter into a chamber, where they said he
la sick in a littell cabbin coverd with paper, Codgkin Dono, the
secretary, going into it and telling hym that the _Tono_ of Firando
was there to vizet hym, and came out againe, telling hym the Emperour
thanked hym and gave hym lycense to retorne to his cuntrey. But they
verely beleeve he is dead, and that they keepe it secret; yet it may be
a pollecie to see whether any will rise against hym in armes.

_June 9._--We trid our elle speare afore oure howse, and took 65 fresh
elles.

Mr. Eaton gave his boy Co Johns aparell and _wakadash_ to his father,
with 5 mas in plate.

_June 11._--We had 2 boattes lading paveing stoones of Cushcron Dono
and Tome Dono; but the Duch grudged to let us have them, saying the
king had geven them the iland and per consequence the stoanes.

Mr. Nealson fell out with me extremly this day, misusing me as he hath
donne the lyke many tymes before, which I have put up and still borne
with his contynewall drunken humors.

_June 12._--I receved a letter from Jo. Durois, dated the 12th currant,
new stile, which is 10 dayes past, with a note in it, dated the 18th
ditto, new stile, in both which he writes how it is certenly reported
the Emperour is dead, with other news of Japon; as also to send back
his negro or slave, yf I can procure it.

2 Chinas came and vizeted me, and brought me a present of a jarr China
wine.

_June 13._--Heare is reportes geven out that Fidaye Same is alive and
in keeping of the _Dayre_, and that, the Emperour being dead, it is now
mad knowne, and that he shall be Emperour and his fortresse at Osakay
built againe. But I doe verely think this is a lye.

_June 14._--This night past came an expres from the king, how he was
at Anushma, a port of Faccata, som 30 leagues hence, and that he ment
to be at Firando to night or to morrow. So Soyemon Dono and other
caveleros went out to meete hym, or rather to goe to hym to the place
where he is, the wind being contrary.

_June 16._--The Kyng of Firando arived at Firando about midnight, and
the Duch shott off certen chambers at his passing by their howse.

I sent our _jurebasso_ to Oyen Dono to desyre hym to tell the king that
I was glad of his Highnes health and safe retorne, and that I would
com and kis his handes, yf he weare at leasure, and, whiles he was
speaking with Oyen Dono, the kyng per fortune or else of purpose passed
by and gave our _jurebasso_ very kind words and said I should be welcom
whensoever I came.

Tayamon Dono envited us to dyner, I meane all the English, he being our
master carpenter, and our work all most ended.

I sent our _jurebasso_ also to Semi Dono and Taccaman Dono to bid them
welcom home, and to tell them I would come and vizet them when they
were at leasure.

Semi Dono sent me word, it was certen that the ould Emperour was dead
26 daies past, and that he saw the place where he was buryed; and
that Shongo Samme did it of purpose, that they might see he was dead.
And the presentes which were geven to eache _tono_ were the legasie
of the dead Emperour, being greate matters both in bars of gould and
vestmentes. And that Shongo Samme gave them leave to stay 3 yeares
without retornyng to vizet hym, to take theire ease for the paynes
they had taken in tym past. But I do verely beleeve he will sowne rise
againe, yf any wars be moved against his sonne within these 3 yeares.

Gonrock Dono passed by yister night to Langasaque, to be governor;
which doth rather conferme me in my opinion.

_June 17._--The grownd on the W. side our new gadong did shrink with
the extreme rayne, and 3 panes of our orchard wall fell downe and
spoild divers frute trees, and all the rest of the wall much shaken and
lyke to fall, the grownd geving way.

We went and vizetted the king, all of us together, viz.: Mr. Eaton,
Mr. Nealson, Mr. Osterwick, and my selfe, and carid a present of 2
barrilles wyne, and 20 cordes of drid fysh of cuttell, and shell fysh,
of eather 10 cordes, with a small pott of conserve of oreng flowers.
He was accompanied with Bongo Samme his uncle, and the father of Sugen
Dono of Umbra, and 2 _bosses_ or pagan pristes, with the agent of
Crates. He took our vizetation and present in kind parte, offring us
any thinge we stood in need of; and soe I craved pardon, telling hym I
would retorne som few dayes hence to kis his Highnesse handes, after he
had rested hym selfe of his journey, to make knowne som matters unto
hym and to have his Highnesse councell therin.

The king had a flat galle pot in his handes and his uncle an other,
which som body had presented unto them. So he asked me whether we had
such in our countrey, and I answered we had. So he desyred, yff any
came in our shiping, that they might be kept for hym. And, retornyng to
the English howse, by chance Mr. Nealson had such a one as the others
were, but paynted after an other fation. So I sent it to the king,
which he took in good part.

_June 18._--I went and vizeted Semydone and Taccaman Dono, and carid
each of them 2 small _barsos_ wyne with 10 cordes drid fysh, 5 of a
sort to each one. They tould me the ould Emperour died 28 daies past,
and that all is now in quiet to Xongo Samme his sonne, in respect of
the death of Fidaia Samme.

After I was in bed, Yesimon Dono sent me word he understood of a ship
or junck that was on the cost of Firando, near an iland 3 leags hence,
and that he had advised the Hollanders the lyke.

_June 19._--The China Capt. tould me how he understood by som which
came this night past from Langasaque, how they heard 2 peeces of
ordinance shot affe per som shipp or junck, of the which I advised
Capt. Speck in a letter sent per our _jurebasso_ Gorezan. He retorned
me answer that he had the lyke reportes brought unto hym, and had sent
out men to heare yf it were true, but could heare of no such matter.
And, sowne after, others brought news how they heard 3 peeces ordinance
shot affe. So I sent out a boate, with 6 ores, to look yf they could
see any shipping on the cost; but they retorned sowne after, the wether
being dark and much rayne, and could see nothing.

Capt. Speck said he desired to talke with me about the state of Japon,
for that he dowbted their might be som alteration by meanes of these
reportes of the death of the Emperour.

The junck proved to be a China, and went along for Faccata, not tuching
at Firando. Yt was a small _soma_ or junck.

The King of Firando sent to begg my 2 golden fishes which the China
Capt. brother sent me, which, much against my will, I gave hym, having
geven his brother the other before.

_June 20._--The King of Firando sent his chamberlen to me with a
present of 2 Japon _catabras_, with much wordes complementall for that
he did not come to vizet me since his retorne from the Emperours cort,
aledging the fowle wether to be cheefe occation. The chamberlen also
gave me a _chaw_[140] cup of tynne.

I sent our _jurebasso_ to thank the king for the present he sent me,
and to tell hym I did not esteeme my selfe worthie of such honer as his
Highnesse did unto me in sending me such a present. He retorned answer,
he esteemed me worthie of much more, and was ashamed it was no better,
yet desird me to take it in good parte, such as it was.

_June 21._--Towardes night came news that a junk or ship was seene upon
the cost of Firando, 4 or 5 leages offe. So the China Capt. went out in
a boate, and Jno. Cocora, our cooke, with hym.

And about midnight came an Englishman with a letter from Mr. Jno.
Baylie, merchant, and an other from Mr. Richard Row, master of the
_Thomas_, who is arived within 5 leages of Firando, and com per way of
Molucos, and came from Bantam the 20th of January last.

I went abord the _Thomas_, and procured boates from Firando to toe her
in. So she entred the harbour about nowne, and shot of 3 peces as we
passed per the Duch house, and 11 for the towne, coming to an ancor.
Jacob Speck, the Duch Capt., came abord before she came in, and brought
a present of 2 barilles wyne, 2 hogges, and a salmon, and had 3 peces
ordynance at his departure. And the Duch answered with chambars, both
as we passed as also at his departure.

_June 23._--The king sent to have a note of what comodities was com in
our ship, to thentent to send it to the new Emperour. So I gave it hym.
Also we procured orders from king to set up in the ship that no Japon
should com abord without leave, to prevent stayling and cozening the
marreners, which the Japons are adicted unto.

The King of Firando retorned 8 fowling peces which the Emperour should
have had; but, now he is dead, Safian Dono retorns them.

_June 24._--I sent an other letter to Mr. Wickham, per King Firandos
man, whoe goeth to the new Emperour with a note of tharivall of our
shipp and what she bringes in her.

_June 25._--Semi Dono, with others, came from the king to look on our
gally pots, and carid som of them, with jugges and pottage dishes, to
shew the king.

This after nowne came in a small junk of China, which came from Osakay
and came into Japon last yeare.

_June 26._--The kyng had dyvers sortes gally pots, posset pots, and
jugges more sent hym this day, as also Semy Dono had 2 galle pots and
10 gren podingers. And Skiamon Dono had 2 or 3 broaken gally pottes and
1 whole geven hym, he coming to fetch the other for the kyng. Ther was
a faggot of steele let fall over bord per neclegence of handing in.

_June 27._--Albaro Munois, Alferis Tuerto, and Pasqual Benois came this
day to Firando from Langasaque, and came to the English howse to vizet
me. I think their coming is to learne what newes is at Molucos and
Surat, the which I did not want to tell them the turuth. Albaro sent me
a present of 2 bandes and cuffes, with three roles of rusk, and Alferis
Tuerto a jar of conserves.

_June 28._--There was 2 men of Fingo and of Firando cutt this day for
quarreling on with an other.

_June 29._--I am enformed how the King of Fingo hath sent to Ikenaura
and caused the man to be cut which began the brute with Mr. Eaton.

Sugen Dono sent a present of frute, and came and vizeted the English
howse.

And Yayamon Dono, kinges shipwright, had 4 blocks or pulleis lent hym
to make others by.

_June 30._--The king sent me word that a nobleman of Xaxma was com to
Firando and desired to vizet our English howse and to goe abord our
shipp, and that he was a man of acompt, and therefore wished me to use
hym respectively; which I did in showing hym the howse and making him a
colation, as he had the lyke abord and 5 peces ordinance for a farewell.

I send Albaro Munois and Gil de la Barreda, the Alpheris, each of them
a gallon bottell oyle and a quart bottell Spanish wyne, glasse bottells
and all for a present.

The nobleman of Xaxma sent to have a sample of gallie pottes, jugges,
tuns, podingers, lookinglasses, table bookes, chint bramport, and
combarbands,[141] with the prices.

_July 1._--Upon good consideration we sent these thinges following for
a present to the 2 noblemen of Xaxma, understanding they are kyn to the
king and greate men in those partes, viz:--

  2 looking glasses, 1 square and 1 8 square.
  2 pere tablebookes.
  2 gallepottes, flat, of 6 _cattis_.
  2 gallepottes, flat, of 4    "
  2 galepottes, flat, of 1     "
  2 gallepottes, high, of 6    "
  2 gallepottes, high, of 4    "
  2 gallepottes, high, of 2    "
  2 green jugges.
  2 green posset pottes.
  2 gren tunns.
  4 single comberbandes harer.
  2 single peeces chint bramport.

Which present they tooke in good part, and retorned me answers per
Mr. Eaton that, yf we would have any busynes with the King of Xaxma,
we should fynd they were men that could doe something and would not
be forgetfull both of their entertaynment at English howse as also
abord the shipp; and that which bownd them the more, the sending these
presents unto them of thinges they had neaver seene the lyke before,
and therefore would not want to signifie so much to the king their
master. And sowne after they sent me thankes per 2 of their men, and
eather of them sent me a present of a banketing box with furneture of
trenchers, dishes, and other mattrs, for 5 men to eate with, after
Japon fation.

Mr. Rowe went to Duch howse with a present of a runlet of wyne, a jarre
conserved nutmegs, and som conserved ginger, and was frendly entertaynd.

Domingo was bownd to serve me 5 years, where I will out of England, and
to fynd hym meat and drinke and clothes, and the rest at my pleasure.

_July 2._--The caveleros of Shaxma sent to buy 20 green tuns and 20
green porringers, which I set at 6 _mas_ per peece. But they would not
geve the price, but retorned them.

And a cavelero kinges man sent a calfe for a present.

Albaro Munos, the Alferis, and Mr. Eaton with them, went abord the
_Thomas_, and had 3 peces of ordinance shot afe at their retorne.

_July 3._--We had news how the junck of Vilango Luis is arived at
Nangasaque from the Manillas, and Miguell de Salinas in her. They bring
news that Don Jno. de Silva is dead before Malicca, and his fleete
retorned to Manilla, but first he drove away the Mores of Achin and the
Duch forcesse from Malacco, as they say.

We have news of an other Japon junck arived from Manillas at
Langasaque, master Yasaman Dono.

We went to the King of Firando with a present.

_July 4._--By generall consent there was a present sent to Capt. Whaw,
China Capt. brother.

And Torazemon Dono sent me a gerdell and a pere _tabis_ for a woman.

Also ther was a present sent to Tonomon Same.

_July 6._--Ther was a present geven Andrea Dittis, the China Capt. And
there was geven two presentes to Soyemon Dono and Torazemon Dono.

The gentelman of Firando, which came from Xaxma, I meane Fony Sames
kynsman, came to the English howse, and sent me 2 barrils wyne and
2 fyshes for a present. He tould me the King of Xaxma had rezolved
in counsell to let us have free trade into the Liqueas and all other
partes of his dominions, but that the 2 noble men, which were here the
other day, durst not tell me so much without order from the king, yet
assured hym it was true.

_July 7._--I receved a letter from Capt. Whaw from Langasaque, wherin
he writes thankes for the present sent hym, as also advising me how 3
of Twans barkes are retorned, which should have gon for Tacca Sanga, or
the Iland Fermosa, but went not thither, but rather a boot-haling on
the cost of China, where they have taken 11 boates or juncks, and put
all the people to death because they stood out and fought with them.

He also wrot his brother to advize me not to goe towardes Miaco this 10
or 12 daies, and that when I went, to goe well provided, for that it
was reported there were pilferyng knaves abroad on the cost of Arima,
and speeches geven out that the _Tono_, or King, of Xaxma meaneth to
make wars against the new Emperour in right of Fidaia Samme, whom they
report to be alive, and that he meaneth to begyn with Langasaque. This
is now the common report.

Yt is said that one boate of Twans men put into a creek at Iland
Fermosa, thinking to have discoverd ferther into the cuntrey; but,
before they were aware, were set on by the cuntrey people, and, seeing
they could not escape, cut their owne bellies because they would not
fall into the enemies hands.

_July 8._--I receved 2 letters, 1 from Jor. Durois of the 16th July,
new stile, and the other from Albaro Munois, of the 17th ditto, with a
peare blew silk stocking and a jarr of _nipa_ sent me for a present,
and Mr. Eaton and Mr. Rowe each of them a jarr of _nipa_. They wrot
me how the Portingals had 4 gallions at Malacca which came from Goa,
one wherof the King of Achin burned with his gallies, and the other 3
the Hollanders burned after, yet before Don Jno. de Silva arived at
Mallaca, and were gon towardes Molucas before he came, he dying for
greefe that he did not com in tyme, as the Span. and Port. report.

_July 9._--The king sent me a melch goate and a kid to Mr. Baylie for a
present, to make use of the milk, he being sick.

_July 10._--I sent Mr. Eaton with our _jurebasso_ to desyre the King
to let us have a greate bark to carry up our goods, and our ould
_bongew_ to accompany me, for that I was desyrous to keep our ould, as
the Duch did, and not to chang every yeare a new, as hetherto we had
donne. He retorned me answer that he had present use of his greatest
barkes, meanyng to go to the Emperour hym selfe within few daies, yet,
notwithstanding, he would provide me of a good bark, and not of the
least; and for our ould _bongew_, he could not spare hym, having put an
office into his hands, but for any other I might make choise and keepe
myselfe to hym ever hereaftr yf I pleased. Mr. Eaton said he fownd the
king accompanid with all his cheefe men, surveing of armor; soe I dowbt
there will be som broyles in Japon before long. God grant all may fall
out for the best.

Pasquall the Spaniard retornd from Langasaque, and Christophell the
Alman with hym, and an ould souldier called Reales. They said that 2
juncks of China were arived from Caggalion in Phillippinas, and 2 other
China junckes from Camboia, laden per Portingalls. And late at night
the pilot arived with an other Spaniard in company with hym.

_July 12._--Towardes night Zanzabar, _allis_ Yasimon Dono, sent me word
that an English or Duch shipp was com to an ancor in Cochi roade, a
league from Firando. Soe I sent out a boate to look who they weare, and
it proved to be the _Adviz_, an English ship, the master called Jno.
Totton. I sent a hogg and a barrill wyne to company; and the purcer or
merchant, Mr. Ed. Willmot, came ashore and brought me divers letters,
viz.:--

1 from Wor^{ll} Company, a joynt letter to rest.

2 from Capt. Jno. Jourden, a duble letter, viz. copie of that sent per
_Thomas_, dated at Jaccatra le 12th January, 1615, with an other per
_Advice_, dated in Bantam le 29th May, 1616.

1 other from Capt. Jorden, a duble letter, viz. copie of 1 sent in
_Hozeander_, with 1, 10th August, 1615, sent per ditto _Adviz_ from
Bantam, who lost her monson, and retorned to Bantam.

1 from Capt. Coppendall, dated in Bantam, le 25th May, 1616.

1 from Diego Fernandas in Bantam, le 13th May, ditto ano.

I delivered 3 _tais_ 5 _ma._ 8 _condrin_ fyne plate to gouldsmith to
make buckles for my sword hangers and chape,[142] sword and dagger, and
I waid the buckels and clasps my ould gerdell containing 1 _ta._ 5 _m._
2 _co._ And the gouldsmith brought the 2 chapes of my sword and dagger,
being silver, and poz. 9 _mas._ 1 _condrin_.

_July 13._--1 went abord the ship _Advice_ to Cochi, and saw her safely
brought into the roade of Firando. We shott of 7 peces to salute the
towne, and 3 when the _bongews_ went away, and 5 at our going ashore,
as also 3 were shot afe at our first coming aboard. And the _Thomas_
welcomed them with 3 peeces from ashore, her ordinance being landed.

I receved these letters following, viz.:--

  2 from Sir Thomas Smith, 1 of November 24th, 1614, and other of 25th
  Aprill, 1615.
  1 from Wor. Company, divers coppies, with 1 inclozed to all us.
  1 from Capt. Jno. Saris, 24th November, 1614.
  1 from Mr. Georg Saris, 20th January, 1614.
  1 from Mr. Francis Sadlar, of 25th November, 1614.
  1 from Mr. Thomas Ferris, of 18th February, 1613.
  5 from my brother, Walter Cocks.

All the abovesaid letters from London.

  1 from Mr. Jno. Gourney, 30th of May, 1616.
  1 from Mr. Jno. Hunt, 27th of May, ditto.
  1 from Jno. de Lievana, 5th June, ditto.
  1 from Capt. Brower, of 21st August, 1615.

All the abovesaid other letters from Bantam.

  1 from Jno. Ferris abord th_Adviz_ at Syam River, le 24th of November,
  1615.

_July 14._--The bark _Jaccatra_ arived at Cochi this mornyng, and
bringeth news of an other greate shipp of Holland, which came out 4
daies before her from Pattania.

Here came reports of the arivall of the bark _Jaccatra_ and an other
greate Hollands shipp; but as yet non com in.

_July 15._--Receved aland the 7 packes broad cloth, with the rest
merchandize, viz. Russia hides, 4 balles; gild leather, 1 case; 3
chistes gallipot; 1 chist jugges; 2 chistes glass botts.; 8 case bott.,
1 with whot waters; 2 casses furs; 1 box callico, etc.; 1 box corall;
1 box amber; 1 trunk falconaria;[143] with a box rootes from Cape,
but are rotten and not worth anythinge. News were brought that 2 Duch
shipps are entred harbour at Cochi, a league from Firando.

The kyng envited us to dyner to morrow, which I gladly would have put
ofe, but could not. The kinges brother came to English howse to viset
me.

_July 16._--I cleard with Yoskey for these matters following:--

                                         _ta.   ma.   co._
  Paid to gouldsmith                       0     1     2
  Paid for dying an ould gowne             0     1     3
  Paid Domingo, my boy                     0     5     0
  Paid for a straw hat for Domingo         0     0     2
  Paid Mr. Eatons boys father              0     5     0
  Paid for tryming my hat                  0     2     0
  Paid for a _catabra_ for Domingo         0     9     5
  Paid making cleane my _cattans_          0     2     5

                                           2     6     7
  More paid for a _kitesoll_               0     2     0
  More for 2 per. shews for Dick King      0     3     0

                                           3     1     7

We were invited to dyner per the king, and well entertayned, and the
China Capt. with us, Mr. Rowe, Mr. Totton, Mr. Wilmot, and the purcer
of _Thomas_, with Mr. Eaton, Mr. Nealson, and my selfe. And after nowne
the 2 Duch shipps entred the haven of Firando, viz. the one called
the _Black Lyon_, a shipp of 7 or 800 tonns, and the other the bark
_Jaccatra_.

The Hollanders report that all the Hance townes in Germany, with the
Kyngs of Denmark and Sweaden, are entred into confedracy with the
States.

_July 17._--There was a man of the _Advice_ ran away, called Tho.
Heath, being guner, but was staid by the offecers of the King of
Firando, and word sent to me thereof.

_July 17._--We carid the king a present as followeth, viz.:--

  4 _tatta._ broad cloth, tawny.
  1 great sheet gilt leather.
  1 pe. callico, fyne, no. ii.
  Conyskins, black.
  10 knyves, at ii_d._ per knyfe.
  1 case bottelles.
  1 comb case and glasse.
  Falconaria.
  25 _cattis_ gad stile.
  1 make (_sic_), monarky Brittan.
  1 map, king in parliament.
  1 genelogy, all kyngs from Brute.
  3 Duch jugges, with covers.

And I had conference about our abuse offred per them of Umbra, which
the king tould me he would assist me in it, in what he might, taking
the present in kynd part.

I went to Duch howse, where they used as very frendly, and Wm. Johnson,
master of bark _Jaccatra_, delivered me a letter from Mr. Jno. Browne,
dated in Pattania the 14th of June; but it had byn opend by som other
before it came to my hands. Advized in it of the _Sea Adventures_
arivall at Syam.

Jno. Jossen arived at Firando from Edo.

_July 18._--A man died out of the _Advice_.

Yasimon Dono came runing, and brought me word that our junk _Sea
Adventure_ was arived; but it proved a false larom.

The Hollandes master, capt., and Capt. Speck came to English howse, and
brought me a present of a barill Spanish wyne, a great glasse bottell
aquavite, 2 Hollandes cheeses, and a small pot butter. Mr. Jno. Baylie
gave me a beza ston[144] for a present--a reasonable bigg one.

_July 19._--Sugen Dono sent me a barell salt raspas[145] for a present.

_July 20._--I delivered three hundred _tais_ plate bars to Mr.
Osterwick to pay botemen, and to deliver som to Mr. Eaton to defray
charges up, and rest to remeane for other occations.

And the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, came and bought currall, viz.:--

                                                     _ta. ma. co._
  2 branches of no. 6, both containing                 3  4    4
  11 littell branches, no. 1, 4, and 5, containing     6  6    0

                                                      10  0    4

At 10 _tays_ plate for 1 _tay_ wight currall.

I receved of the gouldsmith 2 hookes and 12 buckles for my sword
hanger, with a littell pec. silver containing just 3 _tais_.

_July 21._--Mr. Totton, master of the _Advice_, gave me a target and
a peare Pattania pikes for a present. And I gave hym 2 pere silke
stockings, viz. 1 peare red of my owne and an other peare greene, and
sent from Jor. Durois the other day.

A Duch marener, being drunk, stabd a woman, because she would not let
hym enter into her howse.

About 10 a clock at night, Hernando Ximines came to the English howse,
and brought word how Capt. Adames was arived in our junck from Syam,
and that we had goodes com in 2 junkes more besids her.

_July 22._--I went to Cochi, and there met Capt. Adams in our junck,
and carid boates to tow her into the roade, which they did.

And I receved a packet letters from Mr. Benjamyn Fary, wherin was
contayned, viz.:--

  1. A note all charges upon the junkes voyage.
  2. Invoiz goodes sent in _Sea Adventure_.
  3. Invoiz goodes reladed in her.
  4. Invoiz goodes laden in Capt. Shobick junck.
  5. Invoiz goodes sent in Capt. Geequans junck, wherin Ed. Sayer goeth.
  6. Mr. Farys letter to me, dated at Judea[146], in the River of Syam,
  le 3th June past.
  7. Invoiz of goodes retorned to Andrea Dittis, China Capt., for his
  sulfer or brimston.

_July 23._--We had a generall councell this day of divers matters,
viz.:--

  1. Yt was thought fyting to buy or fraight a small China junk.
  2. To sell our junck which came from Syam, yf we can.
  3. To send Mr. Willmot to Nangasaque to attend coming junkes.
  4. To land our goodes at Langasaque, and put it in a sure
  gadong, rather then bring it to Firando, it being a better
  place of sale then Firando.
  5. To procure a _bongew_ of king to remeane abord, to see
  the Japons have their due, and no more, for avoyding of
  scandaloz tonges.

Capt. Adames delivered me 4 letters, which came out of England in the
_New Years Gift_, viz.:--

  1 from Sir Thomas Smyth, dated le 18th Feby., 1613.
  Company.
  1 from Mr. Tho. Willson, 16th February, ditto.
  1 from my brother Walter, ditto, 16th, 1613.
  1 from Mr. Ed. Dodisworth in Surat, 20th Novbr., 1614.

_July 24._--Capt. Adames went with me to vizet the kyng, he being
comen from Syam, I meane Capt. Adames. And we carid a present as
followeth, viz.:--

  2 barelles _morefack_  } from my selfe.
  2 salmons              }
  5 china plattars, porselon  } from Capt. Adames.
  1 parrakita                 }

But he was sick, and kept his bed; so we could not speake with hym.

Late towardes night came news how the Duch junck is arived at
Nangasaque, many men being dead, and the rest so weake and sick that
they weare forced to put in theare for want of men to bring her to
Firando. I meane the Duch junck which comes from Syam.

Sangero Samme fownd a woman of his yisterday playing falce with an
other Japon, for which he presently cut her in peeces with his owne
hands, and, after, the man was brought to the place of execution and
cutt in peeces; and his brother had the lock of haire on his head cut
affe by the hangman with the same _cattan_ which cut his brother in
peecese.

_July 25._--Our host of Osakay (or Sakay) sent his barke to seek
fraight and to carry me up, yf I came. Mr. Wickham wrot a letter to our
_jurebasso_ how he sent her to bring me up, yf I weare not provided for
before; but he wrot me no word at all.

And I delivered two bars Oban gould to Mr. Eaton, with 18 _tay_ wight
Priaman gould. I say I delivered it to Mr. Osterwick to geve to Mr.
Eaton, and put it into the invoyz goodes, and carid up; the bars Oban
gould at 55 _tais_ per barr.

_July 26._--The king sent 2 _bongews_ abord to see the marreners have
their owne, they being brabling knaves, espetially the boteswayne.

Farnando Ximenes gave me a new hatt with a bang [band?] gouldsmiths
work, a peare silk garters, with gould fring, and shewstring same,
ruch.[147]

_July 27._--The King of Firando was very sick this day, so that his
brother and all the nobilletie went post hast to vizet hym. And
sowne after the king sent word he was very ill, and that showting of
ordinance disturbed hym much; wherefore he desired both English and
Hollanders not to showte affe any more till he fownd hymselfe better.

We put all matters abord to goe towards the Emperours court to morrow,
God permiting wynd and wether.

_July 30._--I receved a letter from Mr. Wickham, but had no tyme to
read my letter over, being ready to departe for Edo, and Capt. Adames
abord before me. Soe we sett forward in the after nowne, and having a
good gale wynd, and got to Langowne[148] that night, where we came to
an anchor, it being calme.

_July 31._--About midnight we wayed ancor, the tide serveing, and rowed
it up all the affore nowne; but, after, had a fresh gale westerly, so
that late at night we got to the streate of Ximina Seke,[149] where we
came to an ancor.

_August 1._--We wayed ancor this mornyng an hower before day, but
we[re] forced to stop the tide for want of wynd; but, a gale coming up
after at W., we got after midnight neare unto Camina Seke,[150] and
there came to an anker till mornynge.

_August 2._--After daylight we waid ancor and passed the straites of
Camina Seke, and, the wind being good, we got to a place called Tacca
Sackey, in a bay, to an ancor, haveing made 32 leag., and wated in the
way at a place called Camangare,[151] where our host of that place
brought me a present of dry fysh, and I sent hym a _barso_ of wyne.

_August 3._--After daylight we waid ancor from Taccasackey, and, having
calme, rowed it up till the gale came; and soe, late at night, got to
an ancor at Woshmado,[152] haveing made 30 leagues.

_August 4._--Before day we departed from Woshmado, rowing it up till
the wynd came; and late in the night got it up neare the bar foote of
Osakay, where we rode at an ancor till mornyng.

_August 5._--We put in over the bar of Osackay, rowing against the
wind, meeting above 300 barkes going out; but it was past 10 a clock
before we got up to the towne, where Mr. Wickham, with our hostes, came
out and met us with a banket, _nifon catange_.

I wrot a letter to Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick, how I was advized
per many that it was dangeros to send about our small junck to Edo, yf
she were not com away befor this letter came to his handes, and then
my opinion was to send her for Osackay. Also, not to sell lead under 7
_taies_ per _pico_. This letter I sent per conveance Mr. Albartus.

Sr. Albartus came to vizet me, accompanid with his host and others,
with a banket, _nifon catange_, as many others did the lyke, and late
towardes night our host of Sackay did the lyke, and brought me a
silk coate or _catabra_, and an other of lynen to Capt. Adames, with
comendacons from Safian Dono, whose man he was, as also from Chubio
Dono, his brother, with offer of much frenship. Also our ould host of
Miaco came to vizet me, and brought 2 barrilles wyne for a present.
He fownd hym selfe agreeved the English were gon from his howse, and
would needes know the occation, which proved to be his bad usage of Mr.
Wickham, who lodged above 3 months in his howse, in all which tyme he
never would so much as eate nor drink with hym, but gave out bad wordes
against all our nation. Soe I sent hym away with good wordes, telling
hym I knew by report he was a ruch man, and needed not to care for any
for the English (as he reported), nether would the English be undon
whether they lodged in his howse or in an other.

_August 6._--Our ould host of Sackay, with our boateman and Domingos
mother, came to vizet me, and brought me presentes of frute, hense, and
wyne. And I gave eache of them a singell pec. chint bramport, and a bar
plate containing 4 _ta._ 3 _ma._ 8 _co._ to Mr. Eaton's child, Hellena,
to carry her mother, and a _catabra_ to the wench which brought her.

_August 7._--Our ould host of Osakay, where Mr. Wickham yet lieth,
envited us all to dyner this day, where we had extraordinary and kynd
entertaynment.

_August 8._--We paid to the kinges bark men and our owne as followeth:--

                                                        _ta.   ma. co._
  To the master of kynges bark, 1 bar plat, containing    3     0   0
  To the pilot and stersman of same, lyke plate, 1 bar    3     0   0
  To 42 men mariners, same bark, 1 bar                    2     2   0
  To mariners, our bark, same plate                       1     4   0

            Som totall all amontes unto                   9     6   0

Paid out per Mr. Wickham, and is for demoragese in staying at Firando
10 or 12 daies after they were laden.

Allso ther was lent unto Ishon Dono, the Kynge of Firandos chirurgion,
5 _tais_ plate bars.

I wrot a letter to Inga Dono, Lord Cheefe Justice of Japon, to exskewse
me I went not to Miaco to kisse his Lordships handes, which at my
retorne from the Emperours court [I would doe].

Also I wrot 2 other letters, one to the King of Firando, and the
other to Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., and sent them per the kinges
bark now retorning to Firando. In the kinges letter, I recomended our
English howse and our affares to the tuition of his Highnes in my
abcense, desiring hym to have a fatherly care therof, and to assist
them which I left in all occations they stood in need of.

_August 9._--I sent our _jurebasso_, accompanid with our host, to vizet
the Governor (who is the Emperours kynsman), to exskewse me that I went
not to kisse his Lordshipps handes, by reason of the fowle weather and
the hast I made to goe to the Emperour, but that at my retorne I ment
to doe it, God willing. He took it in good parte, and sent me word I
should be welcom, and that I should fynd hym ready to doe ether me or
our nation any good he could.

_August 10._--We laden all our merchandize and other matters for Edo in
2 barkes, and sent it for Fushemi[153] by water to save chargis, Jno.
Cook and Jno. Hawtery going along with it. Jno. Hawtery went out of our
lodging to a whorehouse, and pawnd a shert and a pere silk stocking.

The King of Firandos man retorned from Court, and bringes word the
Emperour will have all our lead and tynne, of which I advised Mr.
Nealson and Mr. Osterwick, and sent the chirurgion of the kynges bill
for 5 _tais_ therin clozed.

Ther was a _bose_ or pagon prist murthered in his howse; but the
murtherers canot yet be fownd out.

_August 11._--Mr. Eaton not retornyng from Miaco, we were forced to
stay heare this day.

_August 12._--Mr. Eaton retornyng to Osakay before day, wee set
forwardes on our voyage towardes Edo, and dyned at Fraggata.[154] Soe
we lodged this night at Fushema, the charges of the howse amonting unto
8 _ta._ 8 _ma._ 0 _co._

I thought good to note downe that, as we passed along the river side
before we came to Fushima, we saw a dead man cast upon the shore, whome
had byn murthered by som villans; yet the cuntry people let hym lye,
and not geveing hym buriall. And on the other side was a man cursefied
upon a crosse for murthering a merchantes servaunt. And in an other
place (as we passed) I saw som 8 or 10 malefactors heades set upon
tymbers by the hie way side. Yf it were not for this strict justice,
it were no liveing amongst them, they are so villanouse desperate. And
I thought good to note downe that, coming to Fushima, which is but 3
leagues from Miaco, we were enformed that som villanous people sett
upon the gard which kept the 30 bars Oban, which was ofred for sallary
to hym that would discover the murtherer of the _bose_ (and could be
no other but the murtherers them selves), yet carid away the gould at
nowne dayes. This is the report, but whether it be true or no I know
not. It is said this cruel [men] have vowed to kill many men.

_August 13._--Jno. Hawtery, being sent afore with our goods per water
to Fushami from Osakay, and haveing 4 _tais_ delivered to hym to defray
charges, in two dais space idly spent the one halfe in whorehowses and
drunkennesse, I fynding hym so drunken he could skarse stand on his
feete; and, when he is drunk, he is mad furious.

We passed per a towne called Otes,[155] where Mr. Wickham met us and
brought 300 _tais_ in plate of bars with hym. And at night we arived
at a towne called Cosantes,[156] where we la all night. Jaquese, with
Mr. Sweetland and 3 others, went before us with all our merchandize to
avoid trouble and to be ½ a day before us.

Here our host tould us that Jno. Yosson passed by to goe for Edo
yisterday.

_August 14._--We dyned at a place called Mina Cochi,[157] and charges
cost as followeth:--

                                      _ta. ma. co._
  To the goodman for all our dietes     3  0    2
  To the servantes 100 of _gins_        0  1    0

So we went to another place to supper, called Tuchiama,[158] where
we were forced to stay all night by meanes of the rayny wether. Our
charges at Tuchiama was, viz.:--

                                           _ta. m. co._
  To goodman of house for all our diet       5  0   0
  To servantes of howse 300 _gins_.

_August 15._--We dyned at Camiama,[159] and cost to howse 2 _ta._, and
to servantes of howse 100 _gins_. And we went to bed to Shrock.[160]
And, the wether seeming to be good, we hired 2 barkes to carry our
goodes in; and about 10 a clock at night did embark our selves to
have passed an arme of the sea of som 21 leages, to have shortened
our journey as also to save chargis. But about midnight the sea began
to rise with a stiffe gale wind easterly, soe that we altered our
determenation and put downe into the cod of the bay to a place called
Meea,[161] where we arived the morrow after nowne, not without much
danger, haveing had an extreme gust of wynd, with much lightnyng and
thunder, accompanid with rayne, so that it might be accompted a tuffon.
One of our barkes which carid our goodes lagged behind, and so got
not in the mornyng tide, as we did, soe that she ran a greate risge
to have byn cast away by laysynesse of the barkmen. But our _bongew_,
with Goresano _jurebasso_, behaved them selves so that they got the
bark into a creeke (not without much danger, runing over sholes), being
assisted with the men and marreners of one of the Emperours barkes,
which la endocked in the same creeke.

This night began the feast of the dead, and candels hanged out all
night.

_August 16._--This mornyng close, overcast wether, with a stiff gale
wynd easterly, verying more southerly, with greate store rayne sowne
after most parte of the day, but espetially in the after nowne; and
towardes night proved a tuffon, very extreme wether, yet dry wether all
night following and not much wynd. We could not know this night whether
our goodes be much wet or no, the villanous barkmen are occation that
we got not all ashore before the tuffon came, as we did out of our
barke.

_August 17._--We fownd our goodes not so bad wett as we thought, soe,
haveing opened the fardelles and new packt them, we got to bed this
night to a place called Ocasaqui,[162] it being 7½ leagues. We gave the
host at Mia for our diet a bar Oban, with 200 _jins_ to the howse, and
spent 400 _jins_ per way.

The ould Emperour was borne in this towne of Ocasaqui, in which place
their is a very greate castell.

_August 18._--We dyned this day at Yosenda,[163] and paid howse 3 : 0 :
0, and the servantes 100 _gins_. And we went to bed to Aray.[164]

Here we had news how Calsa Samme hath cut his belly, being attaynted of
treason against his father and brother to have destroid them and set up
Fidaia Samme, his enemie. It is thought it will goe hard with Masamone
Dono, his father-in-law; and speeches are geven out that the Jesuistes
and other padres are the fyre brands and setters on of all this, in
provoking children against parents and subjects against their naturall
princes.

This night ended the feast of the dead.

_August 19._--We came to dyner to Fame Mach,[165] and paid 3 _ta._ 5
_m._ 8 _co._, and to the servantes of the howse 200 _gins_. And we la
all night at Mitsque.[166]

Here we had news how Calsa Same was to passe this way to morrow to
goe to a church neare Miaco, called Coye; som say to cut his bellie,
others say to be shaved a prist and to remeane theare the rest of his
daies. All his owne men are taken from hym, and he sent with a gard
of themperour his brothers men. His wife he hath sent to Massa Moneda
Dono, her father. All [he] hath for his alowance in the pagon church
[is] i. _mangoca_[167] per anno. He lodgeth this night at an uncles
howse som 4 leagues hence, called Cacken Gowa.[168]

_August 20._--We dyned at Cackingaua, the towne where the castell
is where Calsa Samme la all night. We met hym and others on the way
in 3 or 4 troups, but could not well understand in which of them he
went, because he kept hym selfe close in a _neremon_.[169] It is said
there goe divers other with him to that church (or pagod), where it is
thought they shall all cut their bellies, som of them being men of 40
or 50 _mangocas_ per anno, which is 8 or 10 tymes more then the King of
Firando hath. Also their is speeches that the Emperour is making ready
forcese to goe against Massamone Dono.

We came to supper to Nishew Sacka;[170] so we made but 6 leagues this
day, and there overtook our goods sent before. So we were forced to
stay theare all night for want of horsese, all being taken up for the
Emperourse service to carry alonge these noble men.

  We paid for our dyner at Cakingaua 1500 _gins_.
  With more to the servantes         0100 _gins_.
  And for supper at Nisi Zaka        1500 _gins_.
  And to the servantes               0100 _gins_.

_August 21._--We dyned at Fugi Eda,[171] and gave to howse 1000 _gins_,
and to servantes 100 _gins_.

And so we came to Shrongo[172] to bed to Stibios, where we understood
that the ould Emperour had left order with Shongo Samme (now Emperour)
not to kill his brother Calsa Samme, but to confine hym into the pagod
aforsaid for 10 yeares, and in the end, fynding hym conformable, to use
his discretion.

I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham of our arivall heare, and how Jno. Cook
and Jno. Hawtery had staved me 5 bottells wyne, 2 potts conserve, a
barill of Zant oyle, and let falle my bag biskit into a river.

_August 22._--About 10 a clock we departed from Shrongo, and paid our
host for the howse a bar of Coban gould, vallued at 5 _tais_ 4 _mas_,
and to the servantes 200 _gins_.

So we went to bed this night at Camber,[173] is 7 leagues from Shrongo,
and spent per way 600 _gins_; and we paid to howse 2000 _gins_, and to
servantes in 2 howses 400 _gins_.

_August 23._--We dyned at Barra,[174] and paid 400 _gins_, and went to
bed at Mishma,[175] 2500 _gins_, and to servantes 200 _gins_; and might
have gon ferther but could get no horses, per reason all were taken up
before for the Emperour.

_August 24._--And we went to Haconey[176] on the top of the montayne,
where the great pond with the devill is, as they report, and spent in
the howse 300 _gins_; and, after, went Odawar,[177] where we la all
night; but might have gon ferther, but could not for want of horses.

_August 25._--The wether proving extreme fowle, we were constraind to
stay at this place called Odowar.

I thought good to note downe how, in the tyme of Ticus Samme, there
was a strong castill in this place, kept by one Wigen a Dono (whoe
marid the doughter of Ogosho Samme, the deceased Emperour). This stood
out against all the forcesse of Ticus Samme, having 100,000 men with
hym in the castell, which Ticus seeing he could not bring hym under,
sent Ogosho to parly with hym and bring hym to reason, or else to cut
his owne belly. So, upon the persawsion of Ogosho, he rendered up his
castell, upon condition that he and all the rest might live peaceably
without punishment. Yet Ticus Samme, having hym in his power, made
Wigen a Dono to cut his belly, contrary to promis.

_August 26._--We haveing remeaned at Odowar 2 daies, departed from it
this morning,

  and paid to the howse a bar Coban        6_ta._ 4_m._ 0_co._
  And to the servantes in the howse        0300 _gins_.
  And for passing passage, 2 places        0520 _gins_.
  And at Oyesa[178] for wyne and meate
    and to servantes                       1200 _gins_.
  And at Fugisau[179] for dyner            1000 _gins_.

At this place two of Capt. Adames tenantes of Febys met us, and brought
a present of 10 loves white bread and a dish of boyled beefe, with 2
bottelles wyne.

And soe we went to bed to Tozuka,[180] 10 leagues short of Edo; from
whence Capt. Adames went before to make ready his howse to receave us,
and to com and meete us in the mornyng before wee enter the city.

I gave our hostes doughter at Oyesa a R. of 8 which I had of Mr. Wilson.

_August 27._--We paid the howse at Tozekay. And soe we arived at Edo
this day about 3 a clock in the after nowne, and lodged at Capt. Adames
howse, he meeting us at the entry of the cittie with our men which went
afore with the goods, who arived heare also this mornyng.

Capt. Adames doth now understand that his brother in law Andrea playeth
the knave with hym, which he would hardly beleeve before.

The King of Firandos brother sent his man unto me to bid me welcom to
Edo. The Spanish pilot and an other Castillano came to my lodging to
bid me wellcom.

_August 28._--The King of Firandos brother sent me a present of 2
barll. wyne and 2 piggs, and 1 barll. wyne and 1 pig to Mr. Eaton. And
Codgskin Dono sent me a chist figges, 10 bundell of _wobi_,[181] and a
dish musk millians; and a merchant brought me a dish grapes. I sent our
_jurebasso_ to thank them all, _nifon catange_.

_August 29._--Andrea, Capt. Adames brother in law, arived heare from
Orengaua late the night past. He brought a present of fresh bread, with
a littell sallet oyle and som poulderd beefe. He is a craftie knave. I
noted downe this present wrong, for Capt. Adames sonne sent it and not
Andrea.

_August 30._--Codgkin Dono sent this mornyng betymes for Capt. Adames,
and tould hym he had spoaken with the Emperour and tould hym of our
being heare, and that we might com with our present when we would. Yet
they thought it best to stay till the first day of the new mowne, which
they accompted a happie day.

About 3 a clock in the after nowne there hapned an exceading earthquake
in this citty of Edo in Japon, which contynewed, from the begyning to
the end, about the eight parte of an hower; but about the halfe tyme
it was soe extreame that I thought the howse would have falne downe on
our heads, and so was glad to run out of doares without hat or shewes,
the tymbers of the howse making such a nois and cracking that it was
fearefull to heare. It began by littell and littell, and so encreased
till the middell, and in lyke sort went away againe.

About some 22 yeares past their hapned an earthquake in the province
(or kyngdom) of Bongo, in which there was a towne (or rather a cittie)
of 4000 howseholdes sunck into the sea, not any living creature being
saved. And at same tyme a mowntayne neare adjoyning was clove in the
middell. And it rayned long haire lyke unto that of mens heads. This
hapned som two yeares before Ticus Samme died. And, amongst Japons,
earthquaks are held for prodigious things; yet they say this province
of Quanto is more subject to them then any other part of Japon.

We opened our merchandiz to lay out a present for the Emperour, and
fownd wanting a treble peece of chint bramport, with above a _catty_
wight of amber, and 9 writing table bookes; and most parte of our gally
pottes broaken per the rude handling of our hackny men and fault of
them should have looked to it. Also 2 bars of tyn stolne per the way,
and 1 treble peece chint stolne heare, after they were opened.

_August 31._--Migmoy brought me a present of wyne, grapes, and waffar
cakes, and tould me that for any difference of accompt, either betwixt
Mr. Wickham or Mr. Eaton and hym, he was content to remit it to my
discretion. He is a craftie fello and very ruch. Amongst the rest, he
tould me he lyked our religion so well that he ment to turne Christian.

Jno. Yossen came yisternight to vizet me and envite me to dyner, with
Capt. Adames and the rest. I answerd hym I would vizet hym before I
retorned.

There was a feeling of an earthquake 2 or 3 tymes againe this day,
espetially about 5 a clock in the after nowne. It shaked the house
mightely, but nothing so forsably as the other day, nor of so
long contynewance. And about midnight following ther was an other
earthquake, much lyke unto this.

_September 1._--This day we carid the present to the Emperour Shongo
Samme, whoe receved it in kynde parte, Codgscon Dono and Shongo
Dono assisting us in the matter. But it was long before we could be
dispached, by reason all the nobles went with presents to the Empr.,
it being the first day of the new moone. Amo[ng]st the rest was the
King of Faccata, who as yet is not permitted to retorne into his
contrey; the reason I canot learne. I think there were not so few as
10,000 persons at castill this day. It is a place very strong, duble
diched and ston walled about, and a league over each way. The Emperours
pallis is a huge thing, all the rums being gilded with gould, both
over head and upon the walls, except som mixture of paynting amongst
of lyons, tigers, onces, panthers, eagles, and other beastes and
fowles, very lyvely drawne and more esteemed [then] the gilding. Non
were admitted to see the Emperour by my selfe, Mr. Eaton, and Mr.
Wilson. He sat alone upon a place somthing rising with 1 step, and had
a silk _catabra_ of a bright blew on his backe. He set upon tho mattes
crossleged lyke a telier; and som 3 or 4 _bozes_ or pagon pristes on
his right hand in a rum somthing lower. Non, no not Codgkin Dono, nor
his secretary, might not enter into the rowme where he sat. Yet he
called me once or twise to have com in, which I refused; which, as I
understood afterward, was well esteemed of. I staid but littell in the
place, but was willed to retorne; and both at my entrance and retorne
he bowed his head. I forgot to note downe that all the rowmes in his
pallis under foote are covered with mattes edged with damask or cloth
of gould, and lye so close joyned on to an other that yow canot put the
point of a knife betwixt them.

The present given was as followeth, viz.:

  1½ blak cloth.
  1½ stammet.
  1½ strawcullr.
  1½ black bay.
  1½ stam. bay.
  1½ straw bay.
  3 Russia hides.
  3 peces diaper.
  3 looking glasses, 1 black, 1 gilt cover, 1 with comb and sizers
  2 pec. Holland cloth.
  2 pec. Sleze land.
  10 single peec. chint bramport, 3 in a peec.
  2 branches corrall.
  10 polisht amber beades.
  2 cheanes white (or corse) amber beades.
  2 chins better amber beades, all unpolisht.
  3 dozen cony skins, silver heard, black and gray.
  1 faggot of steele.
    _cattis_ gad stile.
  Falconaria.
  6 gallie pottes, sundry sortes.
  2 green guggs.
  2 gren tonns.
  1 possit pot.
  1 great gilt India hide.
  50 _cattis_ tynne in bars.
  5 _picos_ lead per tickit.

I sent our _jurebasso_ and _bongew_ to Codgskin Dono and Shongo Dono
to thank them for the paines they took about our busynes, and know of
them when it pleased them I should come and vizet them to kisse their
handes; but they were not com from the Emperours castell. So they left
word with ther servantes.

_September 2._--I sent our _jurebasso_ Gorezano in the mornyng to
Codgskyn Dono and Shongo Donos howses, to see yf they were at leasure,
that I might com and vizet them; but he plaid the knave, and I think
went not at all, but tould me they were gon to the castell. But, after
Capt. Adames went, they sent me word they were at home. So I made what
hast I could; yet, before I could com, the Emperour had sent for them,
so I lost my labour, and retorned to my lodging with the presentes,
refering it till to morrow.

And sent the accompt to Mickmoy to peruse over, for that I would make
an end before I retorned.

_September 3._--We carid 3 presentes, all alike, to Codgskin Dono, Oyen
Dono, and Wotto Dono, 3 cheefe men next to the Emperour, to each of
them alyke.

Also I went and visited King Firandos brother and carid hym a present.

_September 4._--We were enformed of another noble man neare the
Emperor, called Ando Tushma Dono, unto whome it was thought fitt to
geve a present as to the former, this Emperour being newly com to the
crowne, and the Spaniard haveing geven out ill reportes of us that
we rob and stayle from all we meete at sea, which was tould to us by
greate men in the Emperours pallas, which is because Capt. Keeling
tooke 3 of their shipps (I meane Portingals) coming from Surat. But
Capt. Adames did enforme them the trew occation thereof, how they
Portingals did still molest our shiping at Surat, so that now we had
wars against them and comition to take either Spa. or Port. where we
met them, in regard they took us. Yt seemeth there is many papistes in
these partes, which would doe us a mischeefe yf they could; yet the
best is, the Emperour and them about hym are no frendes of Portingals
nor Spa., and the rather for the extreme hate they beare to Jesuistes
and pristes, whom they canot abide, and gave us warnyng that we should
not com in their company, but rather to reveale them, to the entent
they might be punished.

Jacob the Duch man, which came into Japon with Capt. Adames, came to
vizet me, and offerd his servis to the English. He is a cawker, a pore
fello. The Duch offerd hym 3_l._ 10_s._ per month the last yeare; but
he refuced it, and after would have taken it, but then they would not
geve it. And I put hym ofe with fayre wordes, telling hym we wanted no
people, but had more then our trade did afford. I gave his wife and his
sister each of them a single pece chint bramport.

Also we gave 2 pec. grogren, 3 pec. chint bramport, and 6 duble bookes
to the secretaries of Codgkin Dono and Oyen Dono.

This day in the after nowne, about 4 a clock, was an other earthquake,
but of small contynewance, and gave but one great shake.

Mrs. Adames and her sonne sent me a letter from Oringaua, with a peec.
pouldren beefe, exskewsing their not coming to Edo, in respeck of the
Spaniardes which did lie at their howse.

_September 5._--We went to Ando Tushma Dono with a present as the
other, wanting a small looking glass and som sortes gally pots, with
2 maps of London and 88 (_sic_). This man was not within, yet we left
the present behind, and tould his man I would come and vizet hym when I
knew he was at home.

A ruch merchant came to vizet me, and brought me a fat hoog for a
present. Codgskin Dono sent me peares, grapes, and wallnuts for a
present.

_September 6._--We dyned at Jno. Yoosen the Hollanders, where we had
good entertaynment. And, in regard of the kyndnesse he allwaies hath
shewed to Mr. Eaton and Mr. Wickham, to goe to the Court to speak
for them in the abcense of Mr. Adames, it was thought good to geve a
present to his wife and doughter, as followeth, viz. 1 whole pec. chint
bramport, containing 3 pec. of R. _corg._; 1 peec black silk grogren.

_September 7._--I went and vizeted Wotto Dono and Tushma Dono, and
thanked them for the paynes taken in our affares, offering them to
procure for them out of England anything they pleased to geve me
notis of. They took my visitation kyndly, and said they would get our
priveleges renewed and _goshons_ or passes sealed this day, yf it were
possibly.

And from thence we went rowndabout the kyngs castell or fortresse,
which I do hould to be much more in compas then the citty of Coventry.
It will contain in it above 200,000 souldiers in tyme of wars.

We dyned at the Kynge of Firandos brother, where we were well
entertayned.

And towardes night the secretary of Oyen Dono came and vizeted me
at my lodging, and brought me a present of hense; and amongst other
speeches he began to talke of the padres, and that it were good we had
no conversation with them. Whereupon I tooke occation to answer hym
that he needed not to dowbt of us, for that they were enemies to us
and to the state of England, and would destroy us all yf they could.
But that it were good he advized the Emperour to take heed of them,
lest they did not goe about to serve hym as they had donne the Kinges
of England, in going about to kill and poizon them or to blow them up
with gunpowder, and sturing up the subjectes to rebell against their
naturall prince, for which they were all banished out of England.

_September 8._--We dyned, or rather supped, at a merchantes howse
called Neyem Dono, where he provided _caboques_, or women plears, who
danced and songe; and when we retorned home, he sent eavery one one of
them. I had a bar of Coban gould of Mr. Eaton, containing 6 _tais_ 4
_mas_, which I gave them.

_September 9._--Jacob the Hollanders wife brought me a present of
_muches_ and other stuff, _nifon catange_, she being ready to depart
towardes her howse.

Capt. Adames this day, as the lyke every day, staid at the Cort to
solicet of dispach to get our prevelegis and passes, but still put afe;
and amongst the rest the secretary tould hym that it was reported how
there were semenary prists in his howse at Orengaua. So Capt. Adames
sent away an expres with a letter to his wife to look to it that there
were no such matter.

There is new edicts sent out into all partes of Japon, as namely to
Langasaque, Arima, Umbra, and Bongo, which are most of them Christians,
to see to it, that no padres be fownd amongst them, and them in whose
howse they are fownd shall be put to death with all their generation.
This must be followed with extremitie.

_September 10._--Codgskin Dono sent for Capt. Adames, which we hoped
was to have geven us our dispach; but it proved to be nothing but to
enquire ferther about the padres. So he retorned without doing any
thing, they willing hym to retorne on the morrow, as they have donne
the lyke any tyme this 9 or 10 daies, which maketh me to marvell, as I
doe the lyke of the long stay of the Hollanders. God grant all be well
in the south partes, and that they rise not in armes there.

_September 11._--Capt. Adames was all day at Cort againe to attend for
our dispach, but retorned without any thing; only they willed hym to
have patience and to com againe in the mornyng.

Oyen Donos secretary came to vizet me, and tould me he suspected that
our delay grew per meanes of the looking out for padres, which weare
much sought after by the Emperour, and reportes geven out that som
were at Capt. Adames howses at Orengaua and Phebe. So Capt. Adames
wrot againe to his folkes, to look out that no such matter were proved
against them, as they tendered their lives.

Yt is thought that the Emperour hath a meanyng to banish all Christians
out of Japan. God grant all may fall out for the best, for our so long
detayning maketh me much to marvill, and the Emperours hate against the
Jesuistes and fryres very greate.

I receved 2 letters from Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick, dated in
Firando the 5th and 6th ultimo, and sent by Gonosque Dono, who is
com up to vizet Codgsquin Dono, in respect of his fathers death, and
bringes him a present of 30 bars silver from the King of Firando. In
these letters they adviz me of the trowble they had with the covetos
mareners of the junck which came from Syam, and that, as then, no news
of the other 2 junks arival at Langasaque with Ed. Sayer. Also that the
news is that the Amacan shipp will not com to Langasaque this yeare,
she being arested per a marchant of Goa for money the Amacan merchantes
owe hym. This news is come per a gallie and a galliot which are arived
at Langasaque and came from the Manillias.

_September 12._--In respect we are put affe from day to day and canot
have our dispach, I got Capt. Adames to goe to Oyen Dono, the Emperours
secretary, accompanied with our _bongew_ and Goresano our _jurebasso_,
to geve hym to understand, yf he make any dowbt of the matter, that we
are no frendes of the Jesuistes nor fryres, nether suffer any of their
sect to remeane in England, but punish all them which are fownd with
death; this coarse haveing byn kept in England for above the space of
60 yeares, so that the Emperour needed not feare our conversation with
that sect, for that their hatred against us and our religion was more
then against any others whatsoever.

Oyen Dono the secretary used Capt. Adames kyndly, and tould hym and
the other 2 how the Emperour was much offended against the padres, and
therefore advized us not to have conversation with them nor to let them
christen any children of ours, yf we chanced to have any, for then they
might presume we were of their sect, whome the Emperour ment utterly to
extinguish out of Japon. He willed Capt. Adames not to think it long we
were not dispached, the Emperours busyness being such as yet it could
not be done, but within a day or 2 he hoped to end it to our content.

_September 13._--The Emperour went a hawking this mornyng with a troupe
(as it was thought) of 10000 men. It is said he will retorne this night.

_September 14._--Capt. Adames and our _jurebasso_ went to the Court to
get our dispach, but could not be ended to day but referred till to
morrow. The Councell tould them that the Emperour would not write any
letter to the King of Cochinchina, nor meddell in other mens matters.

This night past, about 2 a clock, hapned an earthquake; but of no
greate contynewance. Som say they felt it 3 severall tymes; but I felt
it but once.

We have much ado with Nico. Machievell, _allius_ Migmoy, about clearing
accompts with hym; but as yet not donne. Mr. Eaton paid Singero, the
expres, 1½ _tais_ to spend per the way.

_September 15._--Capt. Adames went this day againe to the Court for to
procure our dispach, but could not be ended, but refered till to morrow
and then he to com with Codgskyn Dono, and so an end to be made.

_September 16._--We could not com to accompt with Nico. Machiavell,
_allis_ Migmoy; so we are forced to go to law with hym.

Capt. Adames went againe to the Cort to have had our dispach, but by
meanes of the fowle wether the Councell went not to the Court, so that
he retorned back without doing of anything. Capt. Adames envited the
merchantes to supper to morrow that envited us the other day.

_September 17._--I receved two bars Coban gould with ten _ichibos_,
of 4 to a _coban_,[182] all gould, of Mr. Eaton, to be acco. for as I
should have occation to use them in gestes or otherwais.

We envited them to supper which envited us the other day, and had the
_cabickes_ as they had. I gave 4 bars, called _ichibos_, to one of them.

_September 18._--Capt. Adames went againe to the Cort to procure our
dispatch, and fownd all the Councell busyed about matters of justice
of lyfe and death; and, amongst the rest, one man was brought in
question about Fidaia Samme, as being in the castell with him to the
last hower. This man was racked and tormented very much, to make hym
confes where his master was, or whether he were alive or dead; but I
canot heare whether he confessed any thing or no. Also the Admeralls
sonne (our great frend), called Shonga Dono, came to towne, having byn
sent out by the Emperour before about busynesses. He had much talk
with Capt. Adames about sea matters, and other greate men in company
with them. And, amongst other matters, they tould Capt. Adames that
they understood theire were certen ilands to the northward, very ruch
in mynes of gould and silver, which the Emperour ment to conquer, and
asked hym whether (upon good termes) he would be pilot. He made answer,
he was not now at his owne dispose, being servant to the English
nation, and therefore could not serve two masters. They asked hym
whether he had heard tell of any ilands called les Ladrones, or of the
theeves. He answered yis, but that his opinion was that they were of
no moment, in respect the Spaniards had not taken them, they lying in
his way as they passed from New Spanie to the Phillippinas. They also
spoake of an other iland, called by the Spaniards Hermosa (or Rico en
oro y plata). He answered he had heard of such a place in conferrence
with Spaniardes.

In fine, the Councell tould Capt. Adames all our dispach was ready,
only they wanted Codgkins Donos hand, he being sick. So he was referred
to com to morrow and bring Codgskin Donos letter.

Paid out to _cabokes_ 3 bars Ichabo gould.

_September 19._--We went to the Admerall yonger, Shongo Dono, and carid
hym a present. And Capt. Adames gave hym 3 gilt Syam skins and a tigers
skyn. He took our visitasion kyndly, and offerd us to do for our nation
what he could. This man and his father are the trustiest frendes we
have in these partes. And I thought good to note downe how this man
entred into speeches about the ilandes Ladrones, taking them to be
ruch in myne of gould and silver. My answer was, that I knew no such
matter, but to the contrary esteemed that yf the[y] had byn such, that
the Spaniard would have had them before now, they lying in the way from
Agua Pulca to the Phillippinas. But my opinion was that yf the Emperour
pretended to make a conquest of any, that the Phillippinas them selves
were of more emportance, and the Spaniardes weake and ill beloved of
the contrey people, and that herein his Ma^{tie} needed not to dowbte
the assistance both of the English and Duch, as occation should serve.
At which speeches he seemed to make a pawse, and in the end said that
they wanted such shipps as ours were. Unto which I answered, I marveled
the Emperour did not make such, haveing both men (I meane workmen),
tymber, and all thinges else necessary. Yt seemed to me that he tooke
notis hereof.

Towardes night I receved a letter from Mr. Wickham, dated in Miaco the
27th ultimo, wherin he wrot that as yet he heard no newes nether of our
small junck nor bark that should com with wood and skins from Firando;
which maketh me to marvell very much.

Capt. Adames went to the Court againe for our dispach, but was put affe
till to morow.

_September 20._--Gonosque Dono retorned to Firando, and viseted me at
my lodging, offring to carry my letter yf I would write; for the which
I gave hym thanks, telling hym I hoped to follow after to morrow.

Capt. Adames went againe to the Court with our _jurebasso_ to procure
our dispach, but could not dispach till to morow.

Shonge Dono the Admerall made an end with Migmoy for our difference. So
he gave twenty fyve bars Coban gould for ballance of all acco., which
Mr. Eaton receaved.

Jno. Hawtery plaid the lewd fello againe, and stole 2 peeces chint
bramport, with 2 handkerchefs Rumall cottony, and a peare table
bookes, to geve to whores. Thus much we fownd and was retorned back.
But we lack many other thinges, as of some chintes, amber beades,
table bookes, bars of tynne, which out of dowbt he hath taken, but
forsweareth it, as he did the other till we brought the partis before
his face. And that which was much worse, he went and cut his haire
after the pagon fation, thinking to turne pagon; which he could not do
heare, allthough he would. Yet there wanted no good will in hym. And,
besides, he is a comon druncard, yf he may com by drink, and when he is
drunk is as a mad man, as ban (_sic_) a humor as any o the rest; for
then he will fall out with all men, and kill and slay, etc.

_September 21._--Migmoy came this mornyng and brought a present, _nifon
catange_, and with hym came a servant of Shonge Dono the Admerall, to
make frendship. So we drunk together and parted frendes, but I would
wish no man to trust hym any more.

Capt. Adames and our _jurebasso_ went againe to Court to procure our
dispach, but could not.

And Chubio Dono came to towne. Yocotta Kaqueamon Dono, Oyen Donos
secretary, brought me a present of 2 _catabras_, 1 silk and the other
lynnen.

_September 23._--The Emperour sent me 10 _kerimons_ and an armor for a
present, 2 _kerimons_ to Mr. Eaton, and 2 to Mr. Wilson. And Oyen Dono
sent me 5 _kerimons_, and 1 and 2 _catabras_ to Mr. Eaton, and the lyke
to Mr. Wilson and our _jurebasso_. And we receved of priveleges and
_goshons_ from the Emperour.

Also I sent a present to Chubio Dono; and towardes night he sent me
thankes with letters for the King of Firando, and sent me a _wakadash_
for a present, and 2 peces taffate to Mr. Eaton.

We could not by any meanes procure the Emperours letter to King of
Cochinchina, he saying he would not meddell in other mens matters.

Goresano plaid the babbling fello against Capt. Adames, whereby Oyen
Dono, the Emperours secretary, had lyke to have falne out with hym. Yt
is this fellos foolish triks which hath gotten hym many enemies, and
put me to much trowble hertofore to save his lyfe.

_September 24._--Otto Dono sent me 5 _catabras_ for a present, with
wordes complementall. And I sent our _jurebasso_ to geve hym thankes,
as the lyke to Chubio Dono, and sent Jno. Yossen word we were ready to
departe to morrow mornyng toward Firando.

I gave the _cabukis_ 1 bar Coban and two _ichibos_ of gould. Shezero
the _coboke_ sent me a Japon cap, and I gave her that brought it 5
_mas_ 4 _condrin_.

We carid a present to Safian Dono. And sowne after he sent me thankes
for it, with a box or packet of letters for the King of Firando. And
Jno. Yoosen sent me a letter to carry to Capt. Speck. And Shonge Dono,
the Admerall, sent me a saddell for a present. Also Otto Dono and
Tushma Dono sent 3 _catabras_ to Mr. Eaton, 2 to Mr. Wilson, and 3 to
our _jurebasso_ Goresano.

Migmoy got the Admerall to entreate me to com to his howse and to drink
with hym to make frendship, as well as he had donne with me. But I
desird his Lordshipp to pardon me, for that tyme did not now permit me,
nether could I goe to Migmois howse in such sort without disparidgment
unto me.

And so this night we packed up all matters to retorne for Firando to
morrow, God permitting.

_September 25._--I sent Goresano before day to the clark of the Privie
Seale, to fetch our _goshon_ or prevelegis and to carry hym a present
of a peece of black silk grogran. He delivered the present but retornd
without the writing, willing hym to retorn anon.

I gave an Englishmans child, called Tho. Flood, a _tay_ in Tagemon[183]
plate.

We could not get our ould preveleges againe, and soe we [were] forced
to departe without them.

_September 26._--I gave the _caboque_ Shezero an _ichobe_ and a silk
_catabra_, and sent the master of them a bar Coban.

We departed towardes Orengagava this mornyng about 10 a clock, and
arived at Febe som 2 howrs before night, where we staid all that night,
for that Capt. Adames wife and his two children met us theare. This
Phebe is a lordshipp geven to Capt. Adames per the ould Emperor, to
hym and his for eaver, and confermed to his sonne called Joseph. There
is above 100 farmes or howseholds upon it, bisids others under them,
all which are his vassals, and he hath power of life and death over
them, they being his slaves, and he as absolute authoretie over them
as any _tono_ (or king) in Japon hath over his vassales. Divers of
his tenantes brought me present of fruite, as oringes, figgs, peares,
chistnuttes, and grapes, whereof there is abundance in that place.

The _cabokes_ came out to sea after us in a boate and brought a banket.
So I gave them a bar of Coban to make a banket at their retorne to Edo,
and gave the boate men which rowed them an _ichibo_; both which soms
Mr. Eaton paid out.

_September 27._--We gave the tenantes of Phebe a bar of Coban to
make a banket after our departure from thence, with 500 _gins_ to
the servantes of howses, and 500 _gins_ to the horsemen (or hankney
men) which carid us from thence to Orengaua; the cheefe of the towne
accompanying us out of ther presincts and sent many servantes to
accompanie us to Orengaua, which is about 8 or 9 English miles, all
runing before us on foote, as homegers to Capt. Adames.

I sent a letter to the Admerall that I ment to vizet hym to morrow; but
he, hearing of our coming hither, had sent me a letter before to envite
me to com to hym, with many kynd offers of frendshipp.

After our arivall at Orengaua, most of the neighbors came to viset me
and brought frute and fish and rejoyced (as it should seeme) of Capt.
Adames retorne.

_September 28._--We went per water to a towne called Misackey,[184]
5 leagues from Orengaua, to vizet Fungo Dono, the ould Admerall, and
carid hym a present. And Capt. Adames gave hym a leopardes skin and 5
handks. chint bramport. And Mr. Eaton gave hym 2 single peces chint
bramport. He entertayned us kyndly at dyner and sent us meate for
supper, and gave me a _wacadash_ (or short _cattan_) from his side; and
sent his men to shew us his sonns howse newly built, being a very fayre
place. This man is one of the best frendes we have in Japan.

_September 29._--We retorned per water to Oringaua, not without much
diffeculty. And the Admerall Fongo Dono departed per water towardes
Edo, to vizet the Emperour the first day of the new moone; but, the
sea being greate and the wynd contrary, he went ashore, and so went
overland per horse.

We gave our hostis at Misakay 2 _ichibos_ for howsrowme and dyet, and
1 _ichebo_ to her eldest dowghter, being wife to a Hollander, and
500 _gins_ to her yongest doughter, and 200 _gins_ to servantes in
the howse, and 300 _gins_ to the howse where Mr. Eaton did lye. And
Capt. Adames gave presentes, viz.: 1 handkerchefe and an _ichebo_ to
Adrian the Hollanders wyfe, 1 handker. and 500 _gins_ to the mother, 1
handkerchefe and 100 _gins_ to youngest doughter, 1 handkerchefe to Mr.
Eatons hostis, and 100 _gins_ to servantes of the howse.

_September 30._--I gave Capt. Adames 2 _keremons_ and Andrea, his
brother in law, one of them the Emperour gave me. And there was geven
out in presentes as followeth, viz.: to Capt. Adames wife, 1 pec. blak
grogren, 1 pec. sleze land, 1 cheane amber beades; and to Josephe
her sonne, viz: 1¼ _tatt._ black cloth; and to Suzanna her doughter,
viz.: 1 whole peece chint bramport; and to Andreas wife, 1 pec. black
grogren; and to Capt. Adames wives mother and an other doughter, viz.:
2 single peces chint bramport; and 1 single pec. chint bramport to
Adrians doughter.

Towardes night arived a man of Capt. Adames expres, sent from Mr.
Wickham with letters and others from Firando, Mr. Wickham advising that
by proclemation at Miaco, Osakay, and Sackay, it was defended that no
Japon should buy any merchandize of strangers. Whereupon he could make
no sales of our comodeties, and therefore did wish me, yf I met the
expres on the way, to retorne to Edo to redrese it, yf I could.

  4 letters from Mr. Nealson, of 9th, 16th, 17th, and 20th August.
  2 letters from Mr. Osterwick of 8, 16 ditto.
  1 letter from Mr. Wickham of 19th September.
  1 ould letter from Mr. Wickham.
  2 letters from Mr. Rowe, of 10th and 17th August.
  1 letter from Mr. Totton, of 20th August.
  1 letter from Mr. Ed. Willmot, of 11th August, from Langasaque.

_October 1._--I wrot 2 letters, one to Mr. Wickham and an other to Mr.
Nealson and Mr. Osterwick and retorned them per same expres, unto whome
Mr. Eaton delivered 3 _ichebos_; and he said Mr. Wickham delivered hym
60 _mas_, wherof he spent 43 _mas_ per the way. And Mr. Wilson, Jno.
Cook, Wm. Sweetland, Jno. Hawtry, our _bongew_, and others, to the
halfe of our company, I sent away directly towardes Miaco. And Capt.
Adames, Mr. Eaton, and my selfe retorned againe towardes Edo, and
lodged at Phebe. We gave 1000 _gins_ to the servantes at Orengaua, for
Capt. Adames nor his wife would let us pay nothing for diet.

_October 2._--This mornyng fayre calme wether, or rather a littell wind
easterly till about nowne, and then the wind vered northerly, a greate
gust all the rest of the day, but not so much per night.

By meanes of this storme (we being onward on our way towardes Edo per
water) we were forced to run over the sholes right ashore, not without
danger; so that it was dark night before we got our thinges on land,
and went to a towne in the way 4 leagues short of Edo, called Cowa
Saky;[185] where we had bad lodging and worse fare.

We paid for our diet at Phebie with our hors hier from Oringaua and
geven in the howse, viz.: 2 _ichebos_ in gould and 1000 _gins_, paid
out per Mr. Eaton. And for our boate hier to Cowa Sackey 1 _ichebo_,
and 400 _gins_ geven to a pilot to help us ashore in a place to land
our goodes.

I forgot to note downe how Mrs. Adames sent powdered beefe, fysh, and
bread, with rise, after us to Phebie.

_October 3._--We went to the secretary Oyen Donos howse to have spoaken
with hym about our occation of retorne, but were perswaded per his men
to attend his coming to the howse of justice, and there might speake to
hym and the rest as they entred; which we did, but were referred of for
answer till the next mornyng. So from thence we went to Codgskin Donos,
but fownd Inga Dono, the Cheefe Justis of Japon, arived from Miaco and
com to vizet hym. So we could not speake with hym.

Also we met there a Spaniard, com from the iland near Langasaque, where
he was arived in a small shipp by contrary wynds going to Manilla,
and might not be sufferd to goe out againe without lycence from the
Emperour.

Jno. Yoosen came to vizet me, and tould me he howrly expected the
Hollanders, and that, tuching the cortalling of our prevelegesse, it
was not to be suffered, it being wrought per Safian Dono and other his
associates to have us pend up at Firando, to the entent to work upon us
as they did on the Portingals and Spaniardes at Langasaque; but (said
he) the Hollanders will forsake Japon before they will be bownd to do
it.

_October 4._--A Duchmans sonne came to vizet me, and brought a present
of powndgranetes and oringes; unto whome I gave a _tay_ in plate fyne,
paid per Gorezano.

I got Capt. Adames to goe to Codgskin Dono with our _jurebasso_, to
make the occation of our retorne knowne unto hym and to aske his
councell (as our cheefe frend) what course we shold take. He spoake
with hym and the rest of the Councell and, as it seemeth, they will
enlarge our previlegese.

A merchant, our frend, envited Capt. Adames, Mr. Eaton, and my selfe to
supper, and sent for the _cabokes_, _nifon catange_.

_October 5._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham, and so to send it for
Firando, advizing how I hoped to dispach our matters to content very
shortly; and sent this letter per a yong man of Firando, neighbour to
Yasimon Dono.

We could have no answer this day tuching our busynes.

_October 6._--We ment to have spoaken with Oyen Dono and rest about our
busynes, but could not com to speech of them, they were so busye about
other matters.

I wrot a letter to the seniora at Orengaua to thank her for our kynd
entertaynment. We carid a present to Inga Dono.

This man is Lord Cheefe Justice of Japon, and now newly com from
Miaco. I made knowne unto hym the occation of my retorne, by meanes
of the proclemation at Miaco that we should sell non of our goodes in
those partes. He tould me it was true that the Emperour had sent downe
such order, that we should have no other place of sales but Firando.
I answerd hym that the Emperour might as well banish us right out of
Japon as bynd us to such an order, for that we could make no sals
at that place, as I had fownd by experience of 3 yeares space and
upwardes. He answerd me he could not withstand the Emperours pleasure,
and that at present all matters were in other manner in Japon then in
tyme of the ould Emperour, and that he could do us small pleasure in
the matter, it being in the secretaries power to do most; yet, as tyme
should serve, he would doe his best.

The letter I sent to Mr. Wickham was kept till this day, and sent per
a man of Firando, neighbour to Yasimon Dono; wherin I advized hym I
dowbted I should not make an end so sowne as I thought, and therefore
wished hym to send away Mr. Wilson and the rest to Firando, but, for
the _bongew_, he might stay my comyng yf he would.

We went also to the howses of Codgskin Dono and the rest, but could not
com to speech of any, they, as it seemed to me, playing least in sight,
which caused me to write 2 letters to Cawkesayemon Dono, secretary to
Oyen Dono, willing hym to stand our frend to solicit his master for
our dispach; which he answered me he both had donne and would doe, but
verely thought we could have no dispach till after the hollidaies or
feast, which begineth the 9th currant and lasteth 3 or 4 daies.

_October 8._--We went to vizet the counsellars againe, to have our
dispach in remembrance. And first to Oyen Dono, the secretary, whoe
tould us that we should speake to Codgskin Dono, for that he could do
nothing of hym selfe. Unto which I answerd that the rest did refer us
to hym, and therefore I besought his Lordship to procure our dispach;
for I stood in dowbt my long staying and want of sales of our goodes
per meanes of this edict would be an occation I should not send away
our 2 shipps and junck this yeare, which would be a borthen to hevie
for us to beare or to answer to our employers. He said he would doe
what he could and take councell with the rest what might be donne. So
from thence we went to Codgskin Dono, whome the servantes tould us was
in the house. Yet could I not come to speech of hym, but lost my errant
with his cheefe men.

I forgot to note downe that Safian Dono was at the secretaries howse,
siting in a darke corner, I being cald in and apointed to syt on the
better hand of hym, not knowing whoe he was till Capt. Adames tould me,
which then I went on the other side and craved pardon as not knowing
hym. In fyne, every one complayneth that matters are worse then in the
ould mans daies, and that this man doth nothing but change offecers and
displace _tonos_, sending and changing one into an others contrey; so
that much grudging is at it and all in law and plitos on with an other,
so that what will com of it God knoweth, for, as the comon report is,
no man dare speake to the Emperour of any matter they think is to his
discontent, he is so furious, and no meanes but death or distruction.
So that what will come of us or our sute I know not, for I tell them it
were as good for the Emperour to banish us all out of Japon as to shut
us up in Firando, it being a place of no sales.

_October 9._--This day was a greate feaste of Japon called Sheco, being
the 9th day of the 9th month. So we could do nothing this day about
our busynes at Court. But all day after nowne yisterday Capt. Adames
and our _jurebasso_ staid wayting at Court gate to speake with the
councellers, who still geve good words.

Jno. Yoosen sent me word his man was com from Miaco and that the
Hollanders would be heare within a day or two.

And Cacozayemon Dono wrot me a letter that he had soliceted Oyen Dono
his master about our affares, and that they were not unmindfull of it,
but would shortly dispach us; only their busynes was much at present
by meanes of the caveleros which came to vizet the new Emperour, as
also for the sending away of the widdo of Fidaia Samme, doughter to
the Emperour that now is, whoe is geven in second marriadg to a _tono_
called ----[186], whoe fought very valiently in defence of the Emperour
at the overthrow of Fidaia Samme.

Mrs. Adames and her 2 children arived heare yisterday from Orengaua.
And I gave Shezeros child an _ichebo_ and Mr. Eaton delivered an other
to the _tuerto_[187] that plaid on the _shamshin_.[188]

_October 10._--Late towardes night was an uprower in the cittie of Edo,
for that a cavelero, called Deo Dono, gave it out that he would take
the Emperours doughter as she went to morrow towardes her new husband,
for that the ould Emperour in his life tyme had promised her to hym,
in respect of his service donne at Osekay against Fidaia Samme. But
the Emperour now would not concent theirunto, but sent hym word to
cut his bellie, which he refuced to doe, in taking of his howse with
1000 men his followers, whoe all shaved them selves, with 50 women of
his, lyke wais protesting to stand out till the death; whereupon the
Emperour caused his howse to be beset with above 10000 men armed, and
ofred to leave his land to his eldest sonne of som 19 years ould, yf
his servantes would deliver up the master in quiet; which coming to
the fathers knowledg, he kild the said sonne with his owne handes; yet
after, his servantes kild their master and deliverd his head to the
men without, upon condition to have their lives saved and the lands to
remeane to the other sonne; which, as it is said, the Emperour hath
condecended unto.[189]

_October 11._--I went and vizeted the King of Firandos brother, and
carid hym a present of 2 barills wyne and a dish of figges, which he
tooke in good parte and offred to send to the Emperours councell to
desire our dispach in his brothers name, which I thanked hym for.

I went to Jno. Yossen to vizet hym and see what news he heard of
the Hollanders. But, as it seems, they were not come to Osakay when
Albartus wrote hym his letter the 23th ultimo; so God knoweth when they
will hither.

_October 12._--We went to vizet (or rather solicet) the Emperours
councell for our dispach, but could not com to spech of any of them.
We found our Castillano at Codgskin Donos, but could have no audience
no more then we. And after nowne Capt. Adames and our _jurebasso_ went
agane to the Cort and sawe all the Councell together, who gave them
fayre wordes as before, biding them com againe to morow.

And towardes night an expres of the Hollanders arived at this place,
who came for a _goshon_ for their junck to goe for Syam. He geveth it
out that Mr. Baylie is dead, but I have no letters of any such matter.

_October 13._--We went this mornyng betymes to Codgskin Donos, before
son ryseinge, because we would be sure to find hym within; but had
answer he was sick and therefore willed us to come againe at nowne,
for that he would not goe out all this day. And so we retorned to Oyen
Dono the secretary, and met his secretary by the way (with the Spaniard
man), whoe tould us he was gon out, and that he want after hym to
procure that mans dispach, which it may be will be at later Lammas.
But afterward we went againe to Codgskin Dono, and in the end spoake
with hym and made our case knowne unto hym, which he seemed to pittie,
and tould us he was not the man now that he was in the ould Emperours
tyme, only he was of this mans Councell, and in his opinion it was
not tyme now to seeke to alter that which the Emperour had so lately
ordayned, but that in tyme it might be amended, our case being better
considered of; and then we should find hym ready to assist us in what
he might. Jno. Yoosen was theare at same tyme when we spoake unto hym,
and heard what past, and at same tyme presented hym a letter from the
Hollandes Capt. telling hym he was on his way to com vizet the Emperor,
but held backe per fowle wether, yet in the meane tyme desired to have
a _goshon_ to send their junck for Syam. But Codgskin Dono answered he
might stay for it till the Hollandes Capt. came.

So now I determen to put up a petition to have a lycence to sell such
goodes as we have at Miaco and those partes, and so to retorne with
their answer, good or bad, desiring in my petition that their honors
will better consider of our first privelegese hereafter.

_October 14._--I wrot two letters, dated yisterday but kept till this
day, the one to Mr. Wickham to Miaco, and the other to Firando to Mr.
Nealson and Mr. Osterwick, advising them of what is past, as also
sending two _goshons_ to Firando, one for Cochinchina and the other for
Syam, to be a meanes to helpe to sell our junck. Also I wrot a letter
in Japons to the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, and an other to Matinga;
and sent all these letters expres per Jaquise.

Cacayemon Dono, the Emperours secretary, sent me word late yisternight
how he had spoaken with his master, and gave me councell to send Capt.
Adames and Gorezano our jurebasso betymes this mornyng to speake with
his master, which they did before son rising; but he was gone out
to the Admerall of the Sea, Shongo Dono, before they came. So they
retorned without doing any thinge. And after, the said secretary,
Cakeamon Dono, came to me and gave me councell to make a petition to
them all, and goe and watch them as they came from the Admeralls howse
and deliver it unto them. He tought me to indite it, desyring them that
yf their affares were so emportunate at present that they could not
speake to the Emperour for enlardging our privelegese, that then it
would please them to geve me a letter of pasification to the justice
of Miaco and those partes, for the selling of such goods as we had
theare, and the next spring I would retorne to renew my sute about our
privelegese.

This petision I deliverd to Oyen Donos handes, which he receaved with a
frownyng countenance, calling Capt. Adames to hym and gave it hym back,
asking hym whie he let on com to him that could not speake, and bad hym
bring our petision hom to his howse. Soe sowne after Capt. Adames went
to his howse with our _jurebasso_, but could not com to speach of hym,
and soe retorned.

It is said that the merchantes of Miaco are com to this place to sue to
the Emperour that we may sell no goodes in this place of Edo nether,
which as yet is not denid us. I am still of the opinion that the
Councell, haveing put it into the Emperours head that it is fitt we
should be restrayned to Firando, dare not now speake unto hym to the
contrary, he being such a furiose man. So I dowbt we shall not now get
any good answer, to my no small greefe.

_October 15._--Capt. Adames and our _jurebasso_ went againe betimes
this mornyng to Oyen Dono with our petition, and he had them bring
it to the castill, which they did, and in the end had for a finall
answer that the Emperours pleasure was that we should keepe factors
at no other place but at Firando, and for our goodes which we had in
any other place, to put it into the custody of any Japon we would for
this tyme to make sales for us, but not to leave any factor English,
nor to send any goodes hereafter from Firando, but to sell all theare.
Whereupon Mr. Eaton and I thought good to leave all our goodes in the
place under the custody of Capt. Adames, for this tyme; and he to leve
order with what other he thought fyt to make sales in his abcense,
because he goeth downe with us now to cleare all reconynges and to
receave his sallary, due to hym per Wor. Company accompt to consort, he
not haveing receved any thing till now.

Here is reportes geven out that the Emperour doth determen to put
Massamone Dono and the Kyng of Faccata to death, with an other _tono_
or kyng.

And it is said Fidaia Samme is alive; but what will com hereof I know
not.

_October 16._--Andrea, Capt. Adams brother in law, came from Orengaua
to Edo, and he got (I meane Capt. Adames) his writing of his howse at
Edo out of his handes and paid hym 35 bars Coban, which is 5 more then
he was to pay; and so made an end of hym to the content of his senora.

And Caukesayemon Dono, the secretary to Oyen Dono, came to vizet me
and to take his leave, we being to depart to morrow, and willed me to
take patience for a while tuching our privelegese, for a matter of
state being once concleuded could not in a day nor 2 be revoked. Yet he
dowbted not but the next yeare it would be amended, when the Emperour
and his Councell had well considered of the matter, as now they began
to enter into it; for all this is donne to banish padrese out of the
cuntrey, and that, for his master and Codgskin Dono, we might be assurd
of them, as he had heard from his masters owne mouth; and that it were
not amis, yf I met the King of Firando per the way coming up to the
Emperour, to put hym in mynd to solicet the matter.

We gave this Cakeyamon Dono a cloth cloke of Mr. Eatons, in respect of
the paines he took since our coming.

There was an earthquake at 5 a clock in thafter nowne.

_October 17._--We departed from Edo at 9 clock and lodged at
Caningaua[190] all night, where we met the Hollanders going up, who
brought me 4 letters, viz. 3 from Firando and 1 from Osakay, viz.:--

  1 from Mr. Wickham in Osakay, le 2th October.
  1 from Mr. Baylie in Firando, 28th August.
  1 from Mr. Osterwick in Firando, le 23th August, kept till 1th
  September.
  1 from Mr. Nealson in Firando, 28th August, kept till 4th September.

Wherin they advized me of Mr. Baylies death, with many other matters.

I forgot we gave presentes as followeth, viz. To Mrs. Adames, 1 loking
glasse, 1 pikture of Solloman, 2 blew tuns, 2 handkerchefs chint
bramport. And I gave _cabukes_ 6 handkerchefes and 2 bundells paper;
and 2 handkerches to Capt. Adames hostis. Also ther was 1000 _gins_
geven to howse; 1 single peece chint bram. to Capt. Adames father in
law; and 1 whole pec. chint bramport to Mattem Dono, a merchant, our
frend. We gave to host at Caningaua 2160, and to servantes in howse
0200.

The Hollanders tould me ther junck, which came from Syam and arived in
Shashma, was cast away coming about for Firando, goods and all, only
men saved. Also they reported that the great Spanish shipp in Shashma
is cast away, coming from thence to goe to Langasaque.

_October 18._--We dyned this day at a towne called Camacra,[191] which
in tymes past (500 yeares since) was the greatest cittie in Japon, and
(as it is said) 4 tymes bigger then Miaco or Edo is at present, and the
_tono_ or kyng of that place, called ----[192], was cheefe commander or
Emperour in Japon, and the cheefe (or first) that took the authoretie
royall from the _Daire_ who was the suckcessor to Shacke. But now at
present it is no cittie, but scattared howses seated heare and theare
in pleasant valles betwixt divers mountaines, wherin are divers pagods
very sumptuouse and a nunry (or rather a stews) of shaven women.[193]
I did never see such pleasant walkes amongst pyne and spruce trees as
are about these pagods, espetially 5 of them are more renowned then the
rest.

But that which I did more admire then all the rest was a might[y] idoll
of bras, called by them Dibotes,[194] and standeth in a vallie betwixt
2 mountaynes, the howse being quite rotten away, it being set up 480
years past. This idoll is made siting cros legged (telor lyke) and yet
in my opinion it is above 20 yardes hie and above 12 yardes from knee
to knee. I doe think there may above 30 men stand within the compas of
the head. I was within the hollownes of it, and it is as large as a
greate howse. I doe esteem it to be bigger then that at Roads, which
was taken for 1 of the 7 wonders of the world, and, as report goeth,
did lade 900 camells with the ruens therof. But for this, it is thought
3000 horses would nothing neare carry away the copper of this. In fine,
it is a wonderfull thinge.

Som report this cittie to be destroid with fire and brimston; but I
enquired of the enhabetantes, and they say they never heard of any such
matter but only that it was burned and ruenated by war.

From Camacora we went to Fugesao[195] to bed; and paid for diet, night
and mornyng, 2 _ichibos_, and to servantes in the howse 200 _gins_.

_October 19._--We dyned at Woyso[196]; and paid to howse 1500 _gins_;
and to the servantes 200 _gins_. And I gave his littell doughter 2
handkerchefs of chint bramport smaller sort. And so from thence we
came to Odouar[197] to bed. And paid for dyet, night and mornyng, 2000
_gins_, and to servantes of howse 200 _gins_.

_October 20._--We dyned at Faconiama[198] on the hill, and paid 1000
_gins_, and to servantes in howse 100 _gins_; and at Mishma,[199]
at hill foote, for colation 300 _gins_. And so we went to supper to
Sammabash, and paid for dyet, night and mornyng, 2000 _gins_, and to
servantes of howse 300 _gins_.

We met an expres per way, sent per Duch for Edo, but upon what occasion
I could not learne.

_October 21._--We went to dyner to Cambara[200]; and paid 1200 _gins_,
and to servantes 100 _gins_. And at Uuy,[201] where Capt. Adames fell
afe horse, 500 _gins_, viz. 300 _gins_ to a bonsetter and 200 _gins_ to
the howse. For it is to be understood that a burd flying out of a hedg
caused Capt. Adames horse to start, so that he fell backward and put
his right shoulder bone out of the joynt, and 1000 to one that he had
not broake his neck. And we went to bed to Yezeri,[202] and paid for
dyet, night and mornyng, 3000 _gins_, and to the servantes 200 _gins_.

_October 22._--Capt. Adames fynding hym selfe somthing better, we went
this day to Shrongo[203] to dyner, to our host Stibio, where we paid
for dyner 2000 _gins_, and to the folkes of howse 200 _gins_. And we
gave a present to Stibio and his wife, 1 pec. blak silk grogren, 1
single pec. chint bramport; and I gave his yongest sonne 2 _ta_.

And in respect Capt. Adames feared his arme would goe out of joynt
againe, he thought it best to stay 4 or 5 daies at Shrongo, and we
to goe before. So we went to bed to Fugida[204]; and paid howse 2000
_gins_, and to the servantes 200 _gins_, and to Capt. Adames hostes
sonne brought present 300 _gins_.

_October 23._--We dyned at Cagingaua[205]; and paid the howse 1500
_gins_, and to the servantes 200 _gins_. We met Georg Durois a league
before we came to this towne, going to the coast to seeke justis
against Safian Dono. He gave me a box of marmalad, and delivered me 2
peare silk stockinges, I silver caller and other black, with 2 peare
white wollen stockinges, but set no price till he retorne to Firando.
He tould me that it was the littell Spanish shipp that is cast away
neare Shashma, and not the greate. Also he said that the great shipp
which is in Shashma bringeth newes that the Kyng of Spaine hath mad
proclemation that all the English and Duch pirattes that rob at sea,
that he will take them under his protection, and geave them freely all
such goods and shipps as they shall take, without reserving any part to
hym selfe.

We went to bed this night to Mitsque[206]; and paid to the howse, for
night and mornyng, 2000 _gins_, more to the servantes of the howse 200
_gins_.

_October 24._--This mornyng overcast wether, wynd W. S.erly, but after,
rayne all the afore nowne, but dry wether after, with much wynd at W.
N.erly, that it blew downe howses and uncoverd others; but dry wether
per night and not so much wynde.

We dyned at Araye,[207] and paid 1300 _gins_. And we went to bed to
Yosenda,[208] pd. 3500 _gins_, and to the servantes 300 gins, and to
the children 200 _gins_. This extraordenary charg was for that we had
extraordenary good cheare, being brought thither by a merchant of Edo,
our frend, called Neyemon Dono, ... I gave one of them an _ichebo_, but
would not have her company.

_October 25._--We dyned at Fugicaua,[209] and paid to the howse
1200 _gins_, and to the servantes 100 _gins_. And we went to bed to
Naromy[210]; paid 2000 _gins_, and to the servantes 200 _gins_.

_October 26._--We broake fast at Mia,[211] and tooke boate from thence
for Guanno,[212] 7 leages. And paid at Mia 500 _gins_, and at Guanno
2300 _gins_, and to the servantes 200 _gins_. For we could get no
horses to goe from thence, although we arived theare at nowne, for
that all were taken up per them which came to vizit the princes. Our
host at Guanno tould me that it was strange to see the presentes which
came daylie to this noble man and his wife (she being the Emperours
doughter), for that all the noble men in Japon came to vizet hym
with presentes, som with 100 bars Oban and as many garments (I say
_keremons_), each one according to his degree. So that there was no
day passed without playes, I meane comodies or tragedies. So that the
rezort of people to that place was such that we could get no horse, etc.

_October 27._--We went to dyner to Shono; and paid to howse 1200
_gins_, and to the servantes 100 _gins_, and I gave the children 2
_mas_ in money Spanish. And we spent at a howse in the way called Sacke
200 _gins_. So we went to bed to Sacca[213]; and paid host 2000 _gins_,
and the servants 300 _gins_.

_October 28._--This mornyng a cold hor frost with a stiff gale wynd
westerly, wynd encreasing all day, so that it might be accompted a
tuffon, but not so much wynd per night.

We dyned at Ishbe,[214] and paid the host 1300 _gins_, and to the
servantes 100 _gins_, and gave the _ropshakes_[215] to drynk 100
_gins_. And we went to bed to Otes,[216] and paid host 5 _taies_ plate,
and servantes 300 _gins_, and for passage over water 300 _gins_.

We met som trayne of the Kyng of Figen[217] going towardes Edo, but he
hym selfe went an other way, because he would not vizet the princes at
Guanno, as we were enformed. There went about 20 women in the trayne
we met, with the wife of the Prince of Figen, who went to her husband
which lyeth pledg at Edo, as all the rest of the kinges sonns of Japon
do the lyke, and those which are married bring their wives with them.

_October 29._--We went to Miaco to dyner, where we fownd Mr. Wickham;
and so I wrot for our host of Sackay to com to som end of our busynes,
and sent an other letter to Cuiaman Dono, our _bongew_, how I was
arived heare. And sowne after I was arived, an ould _boze_, a userer,
came to vizet me with our host of Osakay; and he envited me to supper,
and the _boze_ to dynner, to morrow.

_October 30._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames, and sent it per Jenkese
his man, advising of the base usage of our host of Otes, willing hym to
go to an other lodging, yet to tell hym of his knavery as he passed,
and to buy me 8 or 10 salt salmons, yf they be to be had.

We went to the _bozes_ howse to dyner, called Sofa Dono, where we had
entertaynment for a prince with all them which followed us, I meane
Mr. Wickham, Mr. Eaton, our host, with 2 others, our _jurebasso_, and
my selfe, and all servantes, etc. This man is a greate userer; and the
King of Firando oweth hym much money at intrest, and, as he said, for
his sake in whose domynions we were recedent, and per letters from hym
was comanded to shew us what service he could, was ready to performe it
to his power, accompting it a great honor that I would come under his
rowfe, etc.

I sould this day a littell peece of currall of the 2 I had out in the
box, containing 3 _mas_ 7 _condrin_ wight, for the som of five _tais_,
yet not receved. Our host of Fushamy[218] came to vizet me with a
present of orengis, being glad, as he said, of my safe retorne. We have
much goodes at his howse, which they of Miaco would not suffer to enter
into the towne, standing upon their puntos per meanes of the Emperours
inhebitions.

_October 31._--I sent Goresano, our _jurebasso_, to thank the _boz_ for
our kynd entertaynment yisterday, and to tell hym I thought it best to
goe and vizet the Justis of Miaco with a present of wyne and fish, and
to tell hym what order the Emperour had geven me to sett my busynes in
order and to leave the rest with whome I thought good. The _boz_ came
unto me and councelled me not to cary anything to the Justice howse,
for that neather he nor his deputie were not at home, but, yf either of
them came while I remeaned heare, he would adviz me thereof.

I receved 4 letters to day per a Hollands bark, which came from
Firando, viz.:--

  1 from Ed. Sayer, dated at Conugeshma[219] in Shashma, of his arivall
  there in our junck in greate misery, the capt. and many others being
  dead, he under God saveing her.
  1 from Jno. Ferres in Syam, le 25th of May, sent per Ed.
  1 from Mr. Edmond Willmot in Firando, le 23th September.
  1 from Mr. Nealson in Firando, le 6th of October, 1616.

Mr. Nealson advising me the King of Firando showed them but a sower
countenance in their affares, and denyed them a letter of favour to the
king of Shasma, appointing his brother after long attendance to doe it.

Our host of Sakay, called Tozayemon Dono, arived heare yisternight. He
is the man which hath most holpen Mr. Wickham in our affares. I bought
8 puppets to send to Capt. Adames children, cost 1 _ma._ 2 _co._

_November 1._--Tozayemon Dono, our host at Sackay, tould me that Chubio
Dono had advized hym to shew us all the favour he could, and to furnish
us with 10000 _taies_ in plate or merchandiz, yf we wanted it. Also
he said, for the copper we wanted, that he would furnish us with it
for 3 _mas_ per _pico_ better cheape then the Hollanders had bought of
others. God grant all prove trew. Yet I have a good opinion of this man.

_November 2._--I went to se the monumentes of the towne, viz. the
temple of Dibottes,[220] with the hudge collosso or bras imadg (or
rather idoll) in it, it being of a wonderful bignes, the head of it
reaching to the top of the temple, allthough he sat croselegged, it
being all gilded over with gould, and a great wall or plate behind the
back of it the lyke, whereon was carved the pickture of the son. The
temple of it selfe is the hugest peece of building that eaver I saw, it
not haveing any other thing in it but the idoll, which standeth in a
cercle or chappell just in the midell therof, with 4 rowes of pillars
of wood, 2 on eather side, from the on end of the temple to the other,
each one reaching to the top of it; the compose of each pillar being
3 fathom, and all dyed over with red occar, as all the temple within
is the lyke. And a littell from the north end of the temple is a tower
with a bell hanging in it, the bigest that ever I saw. And from the
easter dore of the temple stand two rowes of ston pillars, of som dozen
in a rowe, a pretty distance on from the other, going downe to a mighte
huge gatehowse, on either side of which within stands a mightie gilded
lyon, and without the gate on each side (as portars) a hudge giant, mad
after a furious fation. The truth is, all of it is to be admired.

And not far from this temple is an other, of very neare 10 skore yardes
in lenghe, I say ten skore; but it is narow. And in the midest thereof
is placed a greate bras Dibotes (or idoll), but nothing neare the
greatenes of the former. And out of the sids of it proceed many armes
with hands, and in each hand on thing or other, as speares, sword,
dagges, spades, arrowes, knyves, frutes, fyshes, fowles, beastes, come,
and many other matters and formes; and out of the head procead many
littell heades, and over the great head proceadeth a glory of long
bras rayes made lyke to the son beames, as the papostes paynt over the
saintes. And on both sids, to the end of the howse, are set 3333 other
bras images, standing on foote upon steps, on behind an others back,
all apart on from an other, with glories over their heads, armes out of
their sids, and littell heades out of the great, as the Dibotes had. I
enquired what those handes and heads did signefie; and it was answered
that they signefied the good and charetable deeds that those saintes
(or holy men) had donne while they were liveing. And it is to be noted
that both the Dibotes and all the other 3333 idols were made after an
excellent forme neare to the life, and clothed with a gowne (or loose
garment) over them, and all gilded over with pure gould, very fresh and
glorious to behould.

And just before the Dibotes below were set 3 or 4 roes of other idolls,
most of them made after a furious forme, rather lyke divells then men;
and behind them all stood two deformed ons, one carying a sack of wynd
on his shoulders, and the other a cerkeled wreath or hoope with many
knots in it, the one resembling the wyndes, and the other the thunder.
In fyne, this temple is the most admerablest thing that ever I saw, and
may well be reconed before any of the noted 7 wonders of the world.

And som distance westward from these 2 temples stands the sepulchre of
Ticus Samme, _allis_ Quambecon Dono,[221] a thinge to be wondred at,
and rather to be admired then to be discribed. It is a hudge big
howse, of an admerable workmanshipp both within and without, far
excelling either of the other temples, and within it many pillars
covered with bras enameled and gilded over with gould; and the flowre
of plankes very black, shynyng lyke ebony. But we could not be sufferd
to enter, but only to look in a wyndor or grates. And to the place
where the corps (or ashes) are set, yow must assend up 8 or 9 steps or
degrees, very lardge, made parte of gilded bras and parte of black
wood or ebony. And by the corps borneth a contynewall lampe, watched
by a _boz_ or pagon prist. And for the workemanshipp about that place,
it exceedeth my memory to discribe it; only, all I can say, it may
well befitt the entering of so famouse an Emperour.

And I had forgot to note downe that before the east gate of the
temple of Dibotes stands a rownd hill of an endifferant biggnes, on
the top whereof standeth a ston pillar, lyke the crosses in papistes
churchyardes; which hill, as I was tould, was made of the eares and
noses of the Coreans which were slayne when Ticus Samme did conquer
that cuntrey som 24 or 25 years past. In fyne, we saw divers other
monumentes and pagods, very sumptuous, with cloisters rownd about them
lyke papistes monestaries, wherein the _bozes_ or pagon pristes live
in greate pompe, lyke our frairs and monks in Christendom, from whence
it seemeth they had their origenall; for the pagon religion is of more
antiquetie, and as many sectes or orders as the Christians.

Capt. Adames came to Miaco this day, being well amended, yet not
without paine in his shoulder.

_November 3._--I bought 3 _chaw_ cups

  coverd with silver plates, plate waynge            6_ta._ 3_m._ 5_co._
  And for cups and workmanship, at 12 _mas_ peece     3      6     0
  And for losse in plate, at 1 _mas tay_, is          0      6     0

                         Som totall                  10      5     5

We sould our silk this day for 312 _tais_ per _pico_, it being reported
the Emperours silk was now set at sale, yt being deare. Also we sould
the ordenary taffeties. And we sent for our broad cloth from Fushami to
this place of Miaco, to make sale of it, our host of Sackay and others
offering to buy it.

Albartus host, in his abcense, came to vizet me with a present.

We agreed to carry a present to morrow to Gonrock Dono, in respect he
is the Emperours servant and may be confermed still at Langasaque, for
ought we know.

_November 4._--I went to Gonrock Dono with a present as followeth,
viz.:--

  1 _tatty_ blak cloth.
  1 Russia hide.
  1 pece sleze land.
  1 pece diaper napkins.
  1 great his gallepot.
  1 great flat gallepot.
  1 littell loe galet.
  1 green ton.
  1 gren porenger.
  1 Duch jugg.

He was not at home; so I left the present and retorned.

I wrot a letter to our host at Bingana Tome to provide iron for me as
followeth, viz. 100 _picos_ best flatt iron; 100 _picos_ small square
iron; 400 _picos_ ordenary short iron.

_November 5._--I went to Gonrock Dono, accompanyd with Capt. Adames.
He gave us frendly entertainment after the order of Japon; and amongst
other matters asked us the price of our lead which the Emperour was to
have, telling me it was all one to hym what price we set, yet withall
advized me that yf we put a hier price then the Hollenders, that it
would be ill taken. I answered that our lead was better then the
Hollanders, and besids had cost us much money in bringing it up, and
that our prevelegis were such that, yf the Emperour bought any thing,
he was to pay the worth, and that at present it was worth 7½ _tais
pico_ in this place; yet was I contented to let the Emperour have it
for 7 _tais_, and, yf they pleased, would make the price allwais so
hereafter, whether it were dearer or better cheape. He tould me he
would adviz the Emperours offecers thereof. And for the steele, he said
the Hollanders sel it to the Emperour at 2 _mas_ per _catty_. So I
condecended to sel ours at same rate the Hollanders doe theirs.

Capt. Adames ould host of this place, which in tymes past would have
geven hym a _higo_,[222] came to vizet me and brought me a littell
Japon box tronk lyke _makary_[223] work for a present, and our _makary_
man brought me a littell scritorio of same work. I had rather be
without these presentes, for, as the ould saying is, the[y] bring a
sprat and look for a herring.

_November 6._--Gonrock Dono sent for Gorezano our _jurebasso_, and
tould hym that this day he would write to the Emperours court about our
lead and steele, but could not give money for the lead above 5 _tais_
per _pico_, because the Hollanders let the Emperour have at same rate;
soe I sent hym back to let me have so much money as he thought fyt upon
the reconyng, and to com to accompt hereafter, and to will hym to lend
me 2 or 3000 _tais_ for 2 or 3 months. He sent me word he would looke
over his accompt, and what money he could spare he would lend me.

_November 7._--We sent presentes to divers as followeth, viz. to Sofo
Dono, the _boz_; and to Pedrogo Zamon, Capt. Adames ould host; to the
host [of] howse wher cloth lyes; and to Yosio Dono, the Hollandes host.

We changed 850 _taies_ ordenary plate for good plate, at 3 _mas_ per
100 _taies_.

The _boz_ Sofo Dono brought me a present, 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2 hense, and
2 bundelles sea weed.

A small earthquake this night past at midnight, but of small endurance,
in Miaco.

_November 8._--Goresano our _jurebasso_ foolishly fell out with our
host Tozayemon Dono of Sackay, and went togeather per the eares with
hym.

_November 9._--I receved seven hundred _tais_ of Gonrock Dono, upon
accompt for 100 _picos_ lead and 10 _picos_ stile for themperour,
and gave hym 2 billes of my hand, viz. 500 upon lead and 200 upon
stile, the price referred to Oyen Dono and Codgkin Dono. The stile was
delivered at Firando, and the lead I must deliver at Osakay.

The 10 of the ward where we lodged in Miaco, with 10 other princepall
men, came to vizet me with a present, _nifon cantange_, only to see the
fation of our English habit and our behavior. I used them in the best
sort I could, they offering me any kyndnes they could about our busynes.

Also in the afforenowne there was an earthquake, but of small
contynewance.

_November 10._--We sould the quicksilver for 185 _tais pico_, and brod
cloth at divers prices. And I bought 54 Japon bookes printed, of their
antiqueties and cronocles from their first begyning, cost 8_ta._ 9_ma._

Albartus the Hollander retorned from Osakay and came to vizet me. He
sayth how Codgskin Dono hath sent the King of Firando word to come up,
sick or whole, although he dye per the way.

_November 11._--I wrot a letter to Firando to Mr. Nealson and Mr.
Osterwick of my arivall heare, and will com downe with as much hast as
I may, with other matters; and sent it per conveance of our host of
Sackay and his man.

And I gave host at Miaco a pece corall of Mr. Tottons, containing 8
_mas_ 1 _condrin_.

So we departed from Miaco and went to bed to Fushamy.[224] And ther was
geven out in presents more to our host Maguian Dono, and to his wife,
to his sonne, to son-in-laws child. To the servantes of howse in money
5 _taies_; and to our host, for dyet and howserowme, 80 _taies_.

And our host gave me 20 salt cod fysh for present, and his wife gave me
a Japon _catabra_ for a woman. And he met us without towne and brought
us a banket in good fation, for which we gave his men which brought
it a bar of silver of 3 _tais_, and to the folkes of the howse where
we eate it 15 _mas_. And after, our _makary_ man met us with an other
banket in state, for which we gave to them and the howse 3 _tais_ 8
_mas_ 8 _condrins_.

I went and vizeted Safian Dono at Miaco, and carid hym 2 barilles wyne
and a fresh salmon, cost all 2 _tais_. He spoake much about price lead,
to let it go as the Hollanders; but in the end agreed at 6 _tais_ per
_pico_.

_November 12._--We gave a present to our host of Fushamy and his wife,
which we did in respect he took our goodes into his gadong these
troublesom tyms (or embargo) when the[y] would not permit them to enter
into Miaco.

  And we gave for dyet at Fushamy          8_ta._ 0_m._ 0_co._
  And for lodhier goods                    5      0      0
  And for servantes in howse               1      0      0
  And we dyned at Fracata,[225] and paid   3      4      5

And so went to bed to Osakay, Mr. Eaton falling extreme sick of a
fever per the way. Our host of Fushamy accompanied us 3 leagues on the
way per water, and brought us a banket after the Japon fation. And a
merchant of Osakay came after us and brought us another.

_November 13._--We sould the rest of our lead this day to our host of
Osakay at 7 _tais_ per _pico_, to pay ready money. And we agreed with
a bark to goe to Firando with merchandize, to roe with 13 ores, for 30
_taies_.

I understood Safian Dono past by to Sakay this day, and sent me word he
would let me have as much money as he could spare, but I know not yet
upon what conditions.

I sent the governour word I would come and vizet hym to morrow.

_November 14._--We went and vizeted Shemash Dono, the governour, and
carid hym a present as followeth, viz.:--

  1¼ _tatt._ black cloth.
  1¼ stamet cloth.
  1½ _tat._ blac bayes.
  1½ _tat._ yelo bayes.
  1 pec. fyne whit basta.
  10 gray cony skins.
  2 flat galepotes, of 6 _cattis_.
  2 hie galepotes, 6 _cattis_.
  2 flat gallpot, 2 _cattis_.
  2 white juges.
  2 green tonns.
  2 gren poringers.
  1 bar steele.

This Shemash Dono is Ogosho Sammas doghters sonne, and the Emperour now
is his uncle. He used us kyndly and promised to write to themperour for
enlardging of our prevelegese. And his secretary is a greate man and
doeth all. This prince accompanid me quite out of his castell, a thing
which he hath not donne hertofore to som kings which came to vizet hym.

Yisternight came a bark from Firando, who bringeth news the king is
very sick and canot com to vizet the Emperour, but sendeth his brother
Tonoman Samme in his place, whoe is one the way coming up.

Capt. Adames and Mr. Eaton went to Osakay this night to dispach som
busynes, and to morrow Mr. Wickham and my selfe to follow after to see
what we can doe with Safian Dono, to take up som monies at interest to
send for Bantam.

_November 15._--I receved a letter from Safian Dono, to way out the
lead to 2 men he sent, and they to deliver it unto the governor of
Osakay for the Emperour. Soe Mr. Wickham and my selfe, being ready to
goe for Sakay, left order with our host Feske Dono and our _jurebasso_
Gorezano and Wm. Sweetland to way it out to them. The[y] would have had
it waid out in parcels of 50 _cattis_, but I would not; only in the end
we agreed to way 5 small bars at a tyme.

And soe wee departed towardes Sakay, where we fownd Capt. Adames
and Mr. Eaton at our host Tozayemon Dono, our good frend. His wife
presented me with a sleeping _keremon_ of silk, and the lyke to Capt.
Adames, Mr. Wickham, and Mr. Eaton.

_November 16._--I got our host Tozayemon Dono to send his men to look
out for our _goco_ copper, to have it ready to lade to morrow, as also
to get 2000 _tais_ in plate ready to carry along with me; for that I
could not stay, tyme being past, but would leave Mr. Wickham a day or 2
to bring the logg and to accompt with hym. So he promised me all should
be donne to content.

Also I receved a bason and ure from our _makey_ man at Miaco; cost 4
_ta._ 5 _m._ 0 _co._

_November 17._--Georg Durois retorned from Edo without doing any thing,
and came from Osakay to this place to vizet me. He sayeth Safian
Dono was com away before he arived at Edo, which was the occation he
could do nothing. I gave hym councell that, when Safian Dono came to
Langasaque, he should get some frendes to make way to hym, and to tell
hym he had rather have a littell with his favour then all with his ill
will, desyring hym to consider his povertie.

We bought 9 bundells paper, comen sort, to writ letters, 100 sheetes in
a bundell, for 3 _mas_ 4 _condrins_ per bundell.

_November 18._--I went to Safian Dono to know whether he would lend me
any money upon intrest, as he promised me; but he put me afe to Gonrok
Dono his nephew, whome he said had charge of his busynes, and he drove
me afe with wordes, ofring to deliver me money for all our sappon[226]
which was com in this junk, at 22 _mas_ per _pico_. So I left of that
matter and retorned to bed to Osakay, having first receved in good
changed plate of Tozayemon Dono our host one thousand two hundred
_tais_, upon accompt of lead and other merchandiz, the lead at 7 _tais
pico_; and gave hym a present. This Tozayemon Dono hath lent me 1000
_tais_ gratis, besids all other favors donne in our busynes, he having
donne more then all the rest.

Also we paid hym for our dyet in his house 16 _tais_, and to the
servantes 2 _tais_.

And I gave Mr. Eatons littell doughter Helena a silk coate, and to her
mother a single pece chint bramport.

Our host sent 3 men with pikes to accompany us to Osakay, with pikes
because it was late.

_November 19._--I wrot a letter to our host of Sakay, Tozayemon Dono,
to com to Osakay forthwith, to geve order for lading of copper, and to
bring rest money along with hym, changed or unchanged. Also an other
letter to Magazamon Dono, our host at Miaco, to send hether a chist of
glas bottelles to carry down with us.

And ther was paid unto Jorge Durois per Mr. Eaton, for money disburced
at Langasaque for us, as followeth, viz.:--

                                                      _ta.   m.   c._
  1 jar conserves of lemons and orang flowers          04    5    0
  1 jar conserves of oreng flowers and peaches         04    0    0
  2 quince trees and 2 baskites of onyons to sett      01    1    0
  120 tallo candelles cost                             02    0    0
  143 candelles cost all                               02    2    0
  1 peare of milstons                                  01    5    0

      Som totall of howse accº. amonts unto           15    3    0


More for my own acco. as followeth:--

                                                            _ta. m. co._
  2 peare silk stockinges                                     07 0  0
  2 pear more receved in way from Shrongo, 1 blak, 1 ashcoler 06 4  0
  2 pear wollen or cotton yorne stockinges, 7 mas per         01 4  0

                                                              30 1  0


_November 20._--Our host Tozayemon Dono came from Sakay and brought me
eight hundred _tais_ more to mak the other up 2000 _tais_. And Eche
Dono retorned from Miaco with rest of the bar copper, being 50 _pico_,
which was laden abord the bark, and the rest is in house ready to lode
to morrow.

Mr. Eatons boy Domingo is to make hym a new bond to serve hym 7 yeares
in these partes, or at Syam, Cochinchina, or Patania, but not to goe
for Bantam nor for England; and is for 10 _tais_ plate delivered his
father and mother a yeare past.

And per lyk agreement he is not to carry Susanna his sister out of
Japon, which is to serve the lyk tyme for 5 _tais_; but he to fynd
meate, drynk, and cotes to both.

_November 21._--Our host of Osakay, Cuemon Dono, gave me a silk
_kerymon_ and 2 silk _catabras_, with 2 sackes rise, 5 sackes charcole,
3 sackes salt, and 5 salted coddes, for a present; and gave Capt.
Adames, Mr. Wickham, Mr. Eaton, Fesque Dono our _bongew_, and Gorezano
our _jurebasso_, each of them a _keremon_ of silk, with other matters
to our followers. And sowne after the Governor sent me an other
present, viz. 5 silke _keremons_, 2 _langanates_, and 2 barelles wyne;
and sent to buy 2 pec. corall, which I sent to hym as a present from my
selfe.

Gorezano our _jurebasso_ having falne out with divers of my frendes
by means of his fowle tong, espetially now of late with Tozayemon
Dono, our host of Sackay, I willed hym to make peace with hym, or
else I would not entertayne hym any longer; at which my admonisions
he set light, as well as at Capt. Adames, Mr. Wickhams, Mr. Eatons,
and others. Whereupon I put hym away. This fellos fowle tong hath much
injured me and others, namely Capt. Adames, against whome he gave out
speeches at Emperours court, that he was an occation we gave not a
greater present to the Emperour and to others, which hath procured
Capt. Adames much ill will, and the lyke to all of us. This Gorezano
had byn a dead man long ago, yf I had not saved hym, and have this
reward for my labour.

_November 22._--I receaved fowre hundred _tais_ of Mr. Wickham upon
acco. of Tozayemon Dono, and gave Mr. Wickham up a note of all the
monies I receaved to carry downe, since I arived at Miaco; which
amounted to eight thousand eight hundred forty and six _taies_, eight
_mas_, and seven _condrins_, wherof 7650 _taies_ were packed up in 6
chistes to goe for Firando, and the rest in an other chist to lay out
for iron and other matters at Bingana Tomo.

Sadaye Dono, the governors secretary, sent me 2 Japon pistolles for a
present. And sowne after came a servant of Calsa Sammes to vizet me
with a present of frute, telling me (as from his master) that he was
sory he could not doe me any pleasure in respect he was in disfavour
with the Emperour his brother; but, yf it were otherwais with hym
hereafter, that then he would do that which now he canot.

_November 23._--Our host brought us _cabuques_, 3, one the cheefe, with
their musick, and staid all night. I gave the cheefe a bar Coban. And
Echero Dono, Mr. Eatons ould host, brought me a present of a _bento_,
or box for 5 persons to eate in, and a fyre harth from his wife; and
Shroyemon Dono, a pike and 10 papers fyne rise.

_November 24._--Gorezano made frenship with Tozayemon Dono, and would
have gladly gotten to be _jurebasso_ againe; but I would not.

_November 25._--I gave the cheefe _caboque_ I single pec. chint
bramport, and her maid 5 _mas_ in plate, and so sent them away.

And we departed from Osakay towardes Firando in the after nowne. We
put over bar of Osakay at night, and divers frendes came after us with
banketes for a farewell.

We got this night to a place called Taccasanga, 20 leagues from Osakay.

_November 26._--So we [made] 25 leagues this day, and came to an ancor
about midnight, it being calme, and so stopped the tide.

This day passed a _foyfone_[227] by us with 20 ores on a side, wherin
went a _bongew_ of the King of Biengos,[228] and came and spoke with
us, seeing we were strangers, and sent me a dozen of larks for a
present. So in requitall I sent hym a small _barso_ of wyne and a salt
cod, which he took in good parte, sending me word, yf we put into any
port of his masters province, we should be welcom and have any favour
shewed us we stood in need of.

_November 27._--We waid ancor an hower before day and rowed it up,
haveing somtyme wynd and somtyme calme. And so towardes night arived
at Bingana Tomo,[229] haveing met a bark of Firando per the way, whoe
tould us our 2 shipps and junk were all ready and attended our coming,
wishing us to make hast. We made this day 15 leagues.

At my coming to Bingana Tomo, I thought to have fownd 600 _picos_ iron
ready bought and waid out, as I writ our hostis; but fownd nothing
donne per meanes iron was so deare, as the worst sort at 17½ _tais_ per
_pico_, and second at 21 _mas pico_, and non of best sort to be had. So
I had thought to have sent back an expres to Osakay to Mr. Wickham to
have bought som theare, but upon better consideration left it ofe, and
thought it better to carry money then iron at so deare a rate. But in
consideration our hostis said she had bought 100 _picos_, worst sort,
at 17 _mas_ 2 _condrins_, I took that and meane to send it to Syam, the
king of that place haveing writ for iron; also a smith of this place
haveing greate store of flat iron a span broad, made of purpose for the
Emperour, but durst not sell without consent of themperours _dico_ or
_bongew_, which he would send unto to know the lowest price.

_November 28._--I delivered two hundred and fyftie _tais_ plate bars
unto Mr. Eaton, to pay for iron at Bingana Tomo, viz.:--

                                                           _ta. m. co._
  168 fardells corse iron, at 65 _cattis_ fardell, amontes
    to 109 _picos_, 20 _cat._                               185 6  4
  016 fardells best iron amontes all unto nett 012
  _picos_, 75 _cat._                                        025 2  0

  The corse iron at 17 _mas pico_, and best at 20 _mas
  cat._                                                     210 8  0


_November 29._--We departed this mornyng from Bingana Tomo towardes
Firando--

  And we paid for our diet                   9_ta._ 0_ma._ 0_co._
  And to servants                            1      0      0
  And I gave an ould woman                   0      4      5

We met 7 boates with the King of Fingos[230] provition, he, as they
say, cominge after to goe up to themperour. And, after them, mett as
many with the King of Bongos in lyke sort.

So we made this day and night following 30 leagues.

_November 30._--We came to an ancor 3 leagues after we had past the
streates of Camina Seak,[231] and thear road all night, it proving a
very storme. So we made this day 13 leagues.

_December 1._--We waid ancor at break of day and road it up with the
tide to a villadg called Mia Nots, 5 leagues from the place we came
from, and after rowed 2 leagues more and came to an ancor againe, the
sea being very greate. So we made 7 leagues this day.

_December 2._--We wayed ancor 2 howers before day, and sett sayle and
came to Shimina Seak[232] 2 howers before night, where we staid all
night per meanes of the fowle wether; Capt. Adames coming in late same
night. So we made 25 leagues this day.

The King of Cokera was at this place with 50 seale barkes, ready to goe
to vizet the Emperour.

_December 3._--We waid ancor and put to sea with wynd provinge varible,
and arived at Firando the morow mornynge at son rising, haveing made 55
leagues per day and night followinge.

And sowne after Ed. Sayer arived at Firando from Shashma, where the
king used hym kyndly, in respect of my vizeting hym as he passed by
this place.

I sent our _jurebasso_ to adviz the King of my arivall and that I ment
to vizet hym to morrow. And he sent a man after to bid me welcom, as
all the princepall of the towne did the lyke; and the neighbours came
them selves and met me, after they heard the shipps shute of their
ordinance.

And the Hollandes Capt. sent his _jurebasso_ to bid me welcom and that
he would have com hym selfe, but that he was busy writing to send away
their ship and junck.

_December 4._--The China Capt. tould me how he had 2000 _tais_ in fyne
plate ready to send in our ship, and that he would write to his brother
to provide more, but the worst was that Langasaque was belegered and
all the passages stopt that no man might retorne from thence. The
occation he knew not; only som said it was to look out for on of Fidaia
Sammes consortes, and others that it was to look out for padres.

Also there was reportes that 25 saile Hollander shipps had taken the
Molucas.

_December 5._--I went and vizeted the King of Firando, in company with
Capt. Adames and Ed. Sayer, with letters from the king of Shashma and
Safian Dono; and I carid the king a present of 2 barrelles _morofack_,
2 salmons, and 5 perfumed fans. He took it in good parte; and I gave
hym thankes for the paynes that Fesque Dono his _bongew_ had taken in
going up with me.

And from thence I went to the Hollandes howse to vizet Capt. Speck, to
know yf he would send me 2 letters in the ship that went for Bantam
and the junck that went for Syam, which he promised me to do, as also
to geve me a letter to Bantam to send in our shipp, to signefie that
it was falce the reportes geven out about carrying the ebony in the
_Hozeander_, and that he was ready to do the lyke for us upon all
occations offered, it being the States pleasure he should do soe.

I wrot 2 letters, 1 for Bantam to Capt. Jourden, per Duch ship, and the
other to Syam to Mr. Benjamyn Farry, per Duch junck.

_December 6._--I sent the China Capt. brother a _kerymon_ and 2
salmons, and gave the lyke to hym selfe, and a _kerymon_ a pece to
Mr. Sayer, Mr. Nealson, Mr. Osterwick, Mr. Rowe, Mr. Totton, Niquan
the China, and Mat[ingas] father, and 1 to Mr. Wilmot; and _miangas_
of gerdelles and showes to Mr. Eatons, Mr. Sayers, Mr. Nelsons, Mr.
Osterwikes and Mat[ingas] women; and a silver _chaw_ pot and a fan
to Capt. China wife; and a pear _tabis_ with string and a fan to his
doughter.

The king sent for me and Capt. Speck, and shewd us a letter he had
from the Councell to tell us we should not trade into no other parte
of Japon but to this towne of Firando and Langasaque, and to adviz hym
eich yeare at ships coming what merchandiz we brought, to the entent to
signefie the Emperour thereof.

We find per experience that the King of Shashma hath shewd us
extraordenary favor, and the Duch to the contrary non at all. The
occation I think is the present I gave hym as he passed by this place
to goe to the Emperor, the Duch not doing the lyke. So that now he let
Matias stay allmost a month suing to speak with hym and might not have
admittance.

_December 7._--A mestiso[233] came to demand passage in our junck for
Syam, and tould me he went in the junck with Mr. Peacock and Walter
Carworden for Cochinchina, and related to me the death of Mr. Peacock
cleane contrary to the report I had before, saying that it was by
mischance, an other boate runing against them in a corant overthrowing
theirs; and that Mr. Peacock was drownd by meanes of money he carid
in his pocket, and that his host was in the boate with hym and hardly
escaped with swyming, being halfe dead when he came ashore; and that
Walter Carwarden, their host, and he went afterward and fownd the dead
body of Mr. Peacock, and brought it ashore and buried it; and that
Water remeaned in the contrey above a month after, not any one offring
hym injury, yet in the end embarked hym selfe in the same junck he went
in to retorne for Japon, carrying all matters left unsould along with
hym; which coming to the knowledg of the Kyng of Cochinchina, he wrot a
letter to Safian Dono, to signefie unto hym that he was inocent of the
death of the English or any other, and that, yf they sent any of their
nation to receave the money he owed them, he was ready to pay it.

I sent a bundell figes, a paper rise, and 2 perfumed fans to our
neighbours, Japon manour, I retornyng from above, viz.:--

To Tome Dono and his wife; to Cushcron Dono and his wife; to Zazabra
Dono and his wife; to Skydian Dono and his wife; to China _jurebasso_
and his wife; to Kitskin Dono and his wife, and a fan and a paper rise
to his mother. And to China Capt. wife a _keremon_, she asking it.

_December 8._--I came to understand that Gilbert Dickenson, being put
in trust to way out the Companies wood to Japons, did secretly consort
with them to wrong the Company to benefit hym selfe: namely in 20
_picos_ delivered to one he gave 22 _picos_, and after went for money
for the said 2 _picos_, which coming to the knowledge of Andrea Dittis,
China Capt., he advized me hereof and caused the money to be staid. He
delivered or wayd out much more to Tomo Dono and Cushcron Dono; but I
canot fynd out in what sort it was, only it was tould me he was seene
rec. money of them and brought it back againe to chang for better, it
not being good. Also he was accused per the chirurgion of the _Adviz_,
called Robert Hawley, that he in secret tould hym he made accompt to
put ten pownd in his purce per waying out of that wood, etc.

_December 9._--I wrot a letter to Soyemon Dono, and sent it per our
_jurebasso_, to entreate hym to speake to the king for the 3000 _tais_
he oweth, to send now in these shipps which will be ready within 5 or 6
daies.

Georg Durois came to this place, haveing past much danger at sea,
staying 6 daies after us, many barks being cast away before his eyes.

The king sent Soyemon Dono and an other to know whether I ment to send
goodes to Miaco and those partes; as he was enformed I did, contrary to
themperours edict. Unto which I answerd that I ment to send goodes to
our host of Sackay, which I had sould hym for the vallu of 1000 _tais_,
for which I had receaved money of hym before hand; and that I might
sell my goods to any man at Firando without geveng offence; and that
he had sent his man with his chap or marke to set upon the goodes, and
ment to com after hym selfe. So they took the answer in good parte.
Also I desyrd hym to be ernest with the kyng for the money he owed us,
to send in these shipps.

_December 10._--We had a generall meeting and councell at English
howse, whereat assested, with my selfe, Mr. Ric. Rowe, Mr. Jno. Totton,
Wm. Eaton, Wm. Nealson, Ed. Sayer, Wm. Nealson, Jno. Osterwick, Edmond
Wilmot, Wm. Colston; where was handled the matter of the runing away
of Tho. Heath and Nico. Wilson of th' _Advizes_ company, with Henry
Blackcolles, Hewgh Hewes, Tho. Somner, and Christorfer Galsworthy of
_Thomas_ company, for runing away with the _Thomas_ skiffe and 350 Rs.
of 8 of Mr. Rowes in money; but being taken, we condemd them, with on
Widger of the _Thomas_ company, their consort, to be duckt at yard arme
3 tymes and whipt at capstayn each one 20 stripes; only Heath the guner
to be but duckt.

Also Jno. Hawtery was brought in question by Mr. Eaton for goodes
stolne at Edo and Osakay, which he could not deny, but fell out in
rayling termes against me, thretnyng me that he would make me to leape,
etc. For which Mr. Rowe carid hym abord and put hym in the bilboes.

The Hollandes junck went out for Syam this after nowne.

_December 11._--We went abord the _Thomas_, and saw execution donne
upon the persons aforsaid, according to order, only Galworthie and
Widger were refered till an other tyme, they being both sick of the
pox, and per the chirurgions opinion would be in danger of their lives
yf they were ducked.

Georg Durois being ready to departe towards Langasaque, news came that
the cheefe in that place was taken and bownd upon suspition. So he
staid till he heard ferther newes.

Capt. Adames entered into extraordenary humours, taking the parte of
the scrivano of his junk with one Miguell, 2 villans that have cozened
the Company, against me and all the rest of thenglish, to mentayne them
before the justice. I take God to witness I do what I can to keepe in
with this man, etc.

News came from Langasaque that men might enter but not com out againe;
so we know not what will com thereof.

_December 12._--We bought a slave of George Durois, pownd (_sic_) unto
hym by one of Firando for 7 _tais_ plate bars, which money is now paid
onto hym. The slaves christen name is Laurenso, and in Japon Sanzero.

Also this day arived a small China bark or _soma_ from Hochchew,[234]
laden with silk and stuffes, in this towne of Firando. They bring news
of the wars betwixt China and the Tartars.

We agreed with ould Mr. Barges of the _Thomas_ and yong Mr. Burges of
the _Adviz_ to goe for pilottes in our junck for Syam. And ther was 50
_tais_ plate bars geven to Skidayen Dono for to make his voyag to Syam,
he being capt. of the junck.

Niquan the China retorned from Langasaque with 6000 _tais_ fyne plate,
sent from Capt. Chinas brother for as, and sent me word he would send
2000 _tais_ same plate to morrow, which he had taken up of a frend for
us at intrest at 20 per cento according to my order, and would take up
more yf we stood in neede.

_December 13._--I receved 16 _cattans_ of Mr. Eaton to send to Sir Tho.
Smith, cost viz.:--

                                                            _ta. m. co._
  2 best sort long _cattans_, at 2½ _tais_ per _cattan_, is   05  0  0
  6 second sort long _cattans_, at 1½ _tais_ per _cattan_, is 09  0  0
  8 short _cattans_, at 8 _mas_ per _cattan_, is              06  4  0

                    Som totall amontes unto                   20  4  0


The China Capt. sent us in 2 chistes plate bars good to melt, to send
for Syam with the rendadors chape upon it, containing in each chist one
thousand _tais_--is tow thousand in all.

_December 14._--Taccamon Dono paid all his ould score and desired to
have 50 _picos_ sappon upon a new acco., to pay next yeare as we sell
the rest.

_December 15._--I delivered one hundred _tais_ plate bars to Andrea
Dittis, China Capt., to deliver to Skydayen Dono, capt. of the _Sea
Adventur_, as his owne, for most advantage; but is for my selfe.

Capt. Adames envited all thenglish to a banket with _cabokes_.

_December 17._--I delivered tow thousand tow hundred _tais_ to Mr.
Eaton in plate, wherof 200 _tais_ was in fyne plate, rest in bars,
and is parte of cargezen sent per hym to Syam, rest being in severall
sortes of goodes, am. to 3043_ta._ 6_m._ 2½_co._

I wrot a letter to the King of Shashma, to geve hym thankes for the
good usadg of Ed. Sayer and the rest in our junck, offring my service
to hym in what is in my power. Soyemon Dono holpe me to endite and
write my letter in good termes befyting so greate a prince.

Also Soyemon Dono tould me that the King of Shashma did much esteem our
English nation, and would suffer us to trade into the Liqueas or any
other partes of his domynions, but would not suffer the lyke to the
Hollanders.

_December 18._--Yasimon Dono and Albaro Munois arived at this towne of
Firando, one from Xaxma and thother from Langasaque; and Yasi came and
viseted me, telling me how our nation were respected in Xaxma, and the
Hollanders nothing esteemed of, and that they were lyke to loose their
processe with a China about red wood com in a junck from Syam put into
Xaxma per contrary wynd.

_December 19._--I delivered my letters to Mr. Eaton, viz.:

1 to Mr. Benjamyn Farry, Cape merchant at Syam, with the cargezon ther
inclozed.

1 to Jno. Ferrers, to Syam, with his bill of 36 pezos or Rialles of 8 I
paid to Capt. Adames for hym, and send hym 3 shutes of aparell by hym.

1 to Mr. Jno. Browne, to Pattania.

Tow Spaniardes came to vizet me, of Andelozea, saying they were
parentes of Harenado Ximines, enquiring for 2 or 3 men that were
escaped out of the Spanish shipps and they said fled to the Hollanders;
but after, Capt. Speck came to vizet me and tould me these Spaniardes
had hanged an English man out of littell ship.

_December 20._--Our junck the _Sea Adventure_ went out of Firando to
Cochi and there came to an ankor.

And Capt. Speck brought me a letter to send to Syam, which I did, and
enclozed it to Mr. Fary with a word or 2. Also Capt. Speck went out
with his boate after our junck to helpe to tow her out, and carid
a present of wyne and porke; and shot afe 7 or 8 chambers and pec.
ordinance as she passed by, and our shipp shot afe each one 5 pec. of
ordinance. And being abord I fownd the capt. drunk, with others of
Firando with hym, whoe demanded a writing of my hand to make good their
preveleges, as also that I should lend hym 200 _tais_ gratis at Syam,
to pay the lyke som heare in Firando, at his retorne, which I denyed
to doe and so retorned ashore, offring hym that yf he were not content
with that which he had, that then he might geve over the voyage, and
I would send an other in his place. They had gon out this mornyng but
that Mr. Eaton was not abord, but about midnight he departed from
hence, Mr. Wickham, Mr. Sayer, and Mr. Osterwick accompanying hym.

_December 21._--Our junck, _Sea Adventure_, put out of Cochi Road
towardes Syam this mornyng. God send her a prosperous voyage.

The King of Goto arived at Firando this after nowne, being bownd up
to vizet the Emperour, but came heare ashore and vizeted the King
of Firando. So it is thought fit to cary him a present, because our
shipping and junck do still com and goe for his contrey, and somtymes
per meanes of fowle weather enter into his harbours, and have byn
kyndly used.

_December 22._--I went and vizeted the King of Goto, and carid hym a
present, viz. 1¼ _tatt._ brod cloth, 3 syngle peces chint bramport, 1
chast fowling peece. He took it in good part, and after sent his man
to vizet me (he being ready to departe towardes Edo), to tell me his
hast was such he could not com to thank me hym selfe, but assured me
that, yf any of our shiping (junckes or other) came upon his cost,
they should be suckared with the needfull, and that instantly he would
adviz me of the arivall of any that were to enter; for which I thanked
the messenger, telling hym I was sory his Highnes was departed on such
a sudden, because I ment to have saluted hym with ordinance as he had
passed out, the which he said he would make knowne to the king, his
master.

_December 23._--I went and vizeted Songero Samme, ould Foyns sonne, and
carid hym a present. Yt is said that the king of this place is to goe
up to themperour forthwith, and soe much Oyen Dono tould me, he comyng
to vizet me yisterday, telling me the king was in great care to provide
me money to send in these ships, he being now put to his shifts in
respect of his going up to themperour. Also it is said Sangero Samme is
to go up to themperour, but upon what occation is not knowne, whether
it be by comandement of themperour, or of the King of Firando, his
nephew. Yf themperour sent for hym, it is thought it is to make hym
kyng.

And I had an ould cloake of Mr. Totton, which I gave to Capt. Whaw,
China Capt. brother, at Langasaque.

_December 24._--We receved 15 barilles gunpolder from Langasaque from
Capt. Whaw. Also I had 18 cakes Surat soape of Mr. Totton.

_December 25._--Our 2 shipps, _Thomas_ and _Adviz_, shot of each one 9
peces of ordinance at son rising, in honor of Christmas Day. And Andrea
Dittis sent me a present of 2 peces black taffeties and 10 greate China
cakes of sweete bread.

We envited the masters, masters mates, and cheefe offecers of both
shipps to dyner and supper, being som 20 persons, as also the China
Capt. and our selves, merchantes, were above 30 persons. And Mr. Rowe
envited us abord the _Thomas_ to morrow to dyner. Mr. Totton being very
sick, could not com, as Mr. Wilson, masters mate of _Thomas_, the lyke.
God send them health.

_December 26._--We dyned abord the _Thomas_, and had 3 peces at
entring abord, with 3 for a health to Honorble. Company, viz. 2 out of
_Thomas_, and 1 out of _Adviz_; with 5 other single healths, viz. 1
to Capt. China, 1 to Capt. Middelton, 1 to Capt. Jourden, 1 to Capt.
Adames, and 1 to Capt. Saris; with 7 peces out of _Thomas_ at going
ashore, and 5 out of _Adviz_; with 3 out of _Thomas_ for the women. And
we had the _cabokis_ after supper ashore, who plaid and dansed till
after midnight, and then went away, being 8 women and 6 or 7 men.

_December 27._--I sent the _caboques_ eight _tais_ plate bars per our
_jurebasso_.

And in consideration of the frenship the China Capt. brother hath shewd
as to procure as money, 3000 _tais_ at intrest, and would let Mr.
Wilmot nor his followers pay nothing for their diet at Langasaque, they
lying theare above a month at a Chinas howse, we gave to the China his
host 1 _tatta_ black brod cloth, and to Capt. Whaw 2 _tatta_ stamet
bays, 7½ _tay_ wight best amber beades, being 130 beades, 2 _tay_ 9
_mas_ worst amber beades, being 10 beades.

Yasimon Donos littell doughter came to vizet me and brought me a
present of oringes, and I gave her a perfumed fan, a perfuming bras
balle, and a bundell of paper.

_December 28._--I wrot two letters (per Andrea Dittis, China Capt., his
direction) unto 2 greate China lordes, viz. to Fiokew, secretary of
Estate, with 200 _tais_ plate bars, delivered to his servant Liangowne,
for to provid charges per way; to Tykam Shafno, concellor of Estate;
and that I delivered 10 bars gould Oban to same man for purpose
afforesaid. The 200 _tais_ bars plate Mr. Osterwick delivered to China
Capt., but put them upon his accompt; but the 10 bars Oban, containing
24 _tay_ wight gould Capt. Whaw delivered of hym selfe, amounting unto
550 _tais_ plate, all going for their proper accompt, yet they them
selves have wrot I sent it (or gave it), as apereth to them in my 2
letters. God grant good suckcesse.

Also I wrot 3 letters in Japon, viz. 1 to Safian Dono, and an other to
his secretary, to desire Safian to geve me a letter of favor to the
King of Cochinchina, for payment of such soms money as he bought goods
for of Mr. Peacock. I say, to pay the money to Capt. Adames and adviz
me how Mr. Peacock came to his end and what became of Water Carwarden.
And the 3rd letter was to our host, Tozayemon Dono, of Sackay, to buy
50 _picos_ _goco_ copper, to send me per first, with such money as he
made of our goodes.

Also Mr. Totton being very sick, I put hym in mynd to make all matters
stright, which he promised me to do.

I paid the China sumaker 18 _mas_ my selfe for 6 peare pantables,
slippers and pomps, at 3 _mas_ pec., for my selfe.

_December 29._--Mr. Jno. Totton, master of the _Adviz_, fynding hym
selfe weake, sent for me, and in the presence of Mr. Edmond Wilmot
tould me he ment to make his will and set matters in order, asking my
opinion to whome he were best to make over his estate, that it might
com to his son, his ould mother, and a sister he had, in respect he was
now in these forren partes of the world of Japon and they in England;
so that, yf he should put it into my handes or Mr. Wilmots, we were
mortall as well as hym selfe; so that he thought it best to make over
his estate to the Honorable Company, our employers, leaving us heare
for witnesses of what past; unto which his adviz I gave comendation,
so that he went on and took an inventory of his estate of goodes and
monies.

And I wrot 5 letters in Japon to severall men, viz. 1 to host at
Osakay, Cuimon Don; 1 to host at Miaco, Menguayemon Dono; 1 to Neyemon
Dono and his partner at Edo; 1 to Capt. Adames wife; 1 to Cacoyezamon
Dono, secretary to Oyen Dono.

_December 31._--I was geven to understand that Tome our _jurebasso_,
whome I ment to send for Bantam to have done hym good and have geven
hym 4½ years tyme he was to serve me--I say I was enformed he owed 15
_tais_ to the _caboquis_ for whoring, with other wild trickes he had
don, as pawnyng his fellows weapons and aparell. So I delivered hym up
his papers and turned hym away, he having beaten his owne father the
day before, who came to vizet hym.

_January 1, 1616-7._--Capt. Adames departed yisternight toward
Langasaque, to buy cables and seales for his junck, I meane our junck
in Shashma (falne to the Company), sould to hym for 750 _tais_ Japon
plate, but cost Company 1289 _tais_, Capt. Adames now being resolved to
make a voyage into Cochinchina in the said junck.

Mr. Row sent me a hat for a new yeares gift.

_January 2._--We deliver 2½ brod clothes to the 2 ships, to make men
aparell this cold wether, both the whole clothes being much staynd and
moughteaten in the begyning or fore end of the cloth for 4 or 5 yardes
in each cloth, viz. no. 338 murrey containing 33 yardes, cost sterling
£21 : 0 : 0, and no. 23½, a straw clr., 16 yardes, cost £14 whole, £7 :
0 : 0; which cloth and halfe was delivered to the _Thomas_ to Mr. Row
and his purcer Colson; no. 524, fawne culler, containing 33 yardes,
cost £13 : 15 : 0; which cloth was delivered to Mr. Edward Wilmot,
purcer to _Adviz_, to clothe the naked company.

Capt. Speck and the master of the great Holland ship came to me to
request us to cary them 3 men in our ship for Bantam, yf they came not
before their great shipp went from hence, which they were determened
to send away forthwith, the yeare being overpast. To which demand I
answered I would take councell and adviz them.

Also the King of Chicongo[235] sent an embassador to Firando, whoe
desired to see our shipps, which he did and had 8 peces ordinance shot
out of _Thomas_ at departing.

_January 3._--Yt was agreed upon generally to send Capt. Speck word
that we would passe his men in our shipps, yf they came in tyme; but
that I ment to send away our shipps within this 3 daies, tyme being
spent.

_January 4._--I gave a fello a _tay_ for nutmegges he gave me, he being
a marrener of the _Thomas_ company.

The _caboques_ took Tome prisoner for 15 _tais_ he owed them for
lechery, and, not haveing to pay, set his body to sale, or else might
take hym for slave, no one geveing the money for hym.

_January 5._--The ship carpenters made complaint because the howse
carpenters wrought abord our shipps, and got the kyng to warne the
howse carpenters not to doe soe no more, although he had formerly geven
me leave. So I sent our _jurebasso_ to the secretary, Oyen Dono, to get
the kings formor promis performed.

_January 6._--Capt. Speck sent me word the greate shipp calld the
_Black Lyon_ ment to put to sea to night to goe for Bantam, and that yf
I would write a word or 2 he would deliver it. So I wrot a letter to
Capt. Jourden, how our 2 shipps were ready, and ment to send away the
_Thomas_ to morrow, but to stay the _Adviz_ 10 or 12 daies, in respeck
the master, Mr. Totton, was sick and not able at present to put to sea.

We laded 6 chists plate abord the _Thomas_, being in all 8000 _tais_,
all fyne melted China plate.

_January 7._--To day Taccamon Dono sent to me to end the matter betwixt
the Japon Miguell and his consort about wood of Syam they cleamed
in our junck, and desird me for his sake to geve them 2 _picos_,
otherwais, yf law proceaded, it would cost them their lives. So I
condecended.

_January 8._--The King of Firando sent a writing unto me to have me
set my hand unto it, that I sent goods up to Miaco to pay 1000 _tais_
lent me by Tozayemon Dono. Unto which I answered I sent no goods up,
but delivered and sould them heare to his man he sent downe to doe it
of purpose, and shewd them my letter receved from Tozayemon Dono to
same effect. Yet this would not serve, but he sent his man severall
tymes to have me ferme[236] unto it, which still I refused, referring
hym to take a recept from Tozayemon Donos man that bought the goods (or
rather receved them) for his master. In fyne, this _Tono_ of Firando
either doth it to bring me into danger of sending up goods (a thing
contrary to the Emperours edict), or else he would begyn a new custom,
to have me geve hym notis of what goods I sell or to whome, which by my
prevelegese I am not bound unto, but only to bring our shiping to his
port of Firando, but to sell to whome I will without geveing notis to
hym. In fine, I had much ado about it, with Bending of many messingers,
as also employing the Capt. China to perswade me unto it. Yet I denid
to doe it, with reason.

Also the _Tono_ sent his _bongew_ to recon with us about tymber they
brought for reparyng our 2 shipps, as knees and beames, but all was
ended before those tymbers came; yet would they have us take them, and
set the knees at 20 _tais_ the peece, and the beames at 100 _tais_
peece, they in consience not being worth above the 10th parte they
prize them at.

_January 9._--The king sent still to have me set my hand to a writing
concernyng sending up goods to Miaco, but I denid it, and went to
Oyen Dono to tell hym my reasons, and to enforme the kyng thereof,
which he promised me to doe, saving I had greate reason in doing that
which I did; yet after I had much ado about the said matter, per other
messengers sent, but still denid fermyng, allthough they thretned to
bring the matter in question before the Emperour.

The China Capt. envited the king and the nobles to dyner, and feasted
them both day and night with a China play; and after, they bid them
selves his gestes againe to morrow, to have the _caboques_, or women
plaiers of Japon.

_January 10._--I got Capt. Adames and Mr. Rowe to goe to Mr. Totton, to
perswade hym to stay here till next monson, in respect of his sicknes,
to the entent we might send away both shipps together; unto which he
answerd that we might make them ready, and, yf he fownd he were not
abell to goe, then he was content to goe (_sic_), or, if we pleased to
let hym have the shipp to stay but 8 or 10 daies more, he made no dowbt
but he should be well able to goe in her.

_January 12._--I went with Mr. Rowe to the king to take his leave and
offer hym our servis, eather at Bantam or in England. He seemed to take
it in good part, and made us colation, and soe let us departe. And at
night he sent 2 armors of Japon for a present to Mr. Rowe.

_January 13._--We went out with the _Thomas_ for Chochie. But the king
sent word to desire us to shoot afe no ordinance till we came out as
far as Cochi. The reason was, his brothers wife was brought to bead,
and therefore wold not have her disturbed.

We had 11 boates with 2 _bongews_ to toe out our shipp, and at ther and
our retorne ashore they shot afe 7 peeces ordinance.

_January 15._--I went abord the _Thomas_, and carid my letters, viz.:--

  1 to Mr. Humphrey Slany, with 2 beakers.
  1 to my brother, Jno. Cocks, in Staffordshire.
  1 to Peter Turner and Diego Farnandos, with 2 beakers.
  1 to Mr. Jno. Hunt.
  1 to Sophone Cozucke.
  1 to Mr. Christofer Lanman, with 1 beaker, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Fra. Sadler and Mr. Ric. Atkinson, with 2 beakers, copie.
  1 to Sir Tho. Hewet and Sir Wm. with _makery_ ware, per copie.
  1 to my brother, Walter Cocks.
  1 to Mr. Francis and George Dorington, with 4 beakers.
  1 to Mr. Barnard Couper, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Jno. Gourney, per coppie.
  1 to Generall Keeling, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Wm. Sewall of Coventry, per coppie, 2 beakers.
  1 to Mr. Tho. Chase, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Georg. Balle, per coppie.
  1 to Capt. Raphe Coppindall, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. James Foster, master of _Clove_, with chaine and whistell:
  copie.
  1 to Capt. Samwell Castleton, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Tho. Willson, Esquir, with _makary_ ware: coppie.
  1 to Mr. Wm. Greenwell, deputy, with _makary_ ware: copie.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Saris, with 2 beakers: coppie.
  1 to Sir Tho. Smith, knight, as per coppie.
  1 to generall Company, as per coppie.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Jourden, as per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Robt. Offley and Mr. Raphe Freman.
  1 to Mr. Ed. James and Mr. Lawrance Green.

But, the wether being fowle, we went not abord, but taried till
to-morrow.

All the letters afforsaid were dated the 1th day of January, but not
fermed till now.

_January 16._--We went abord and delivered all the letters as
afforsaid, with the bookes made up in a box, I meane bookes of accompt,
journall, and legear, and the keys of 6 chists money sealed up and in
paper and sent Capt. Jorden, as also 4 other letters, viz.:--

  1 to the generall Company, per coppie.
  1 to Mr. Thomas Willson, Esquir, sent per Mr. Raphe Willson.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Jourden, per Wm. Sweetland.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Jourden, per Lengow, a China, to lend 500 _pezos_.

Mr. Raphe Willson gave me an English book called Essaies.

_January 17._--Towardes night the _Thomas_ waid ancor and put to sea.
God send her a prosperous voyage.

_January 19._--The boteswayne and an other offecer in Giquans junck
came to vizet me, Ed. Sayer telling me they stood to hym in all
extremeties, otherwais all had gon to wrack. So we gave 2 single peces
chint bramport to the boteswayne and 1 to the other.

_January 21._--I paid as followeth my selfe, viz.:--

                                                        _ta. ma. co._
  To the gouldsmith, for working buckells, my gerdell
  and hangers                                            2   1   2
  To Co. Jno. for 2 _kitesolls_ for me                   0   5   0
  And I paid the fatt China telier                       3   2   2
  And to the China haberdasher                           0   4   0

We agreed with Gorezano to keepe the shopp with all sortes merchandiz,
and geve up acco. weekly of what is sould, and to looke to the chang of
all our monies; he to fynd hym selfe victuelles and to have 2 _tais_
per month.

_January 22._--I paid 7½ _mas_ to Matinga for cotton coates for Bicho,
Jeffery, Dick, Otto, and Fuca, at 1½ _mas_ per peece, and I gave Bicho,
Jeffrey and Dick each of them a _keremon_ of silk, redy made.

_January 23._--I bought 3 gerdelles, cost a _mas_ and halfe per peece,
for Bicho, Jeffrey and Dick, and gave them them.

_January 24._--I paid Jno. _jurebasso_ laid out for me, viz.:--

                                                         _ta. m. co._
  Pro silver work for the _cattan_ sent Sr. Tho. Smith    0  6  0
  Pro workmanshipp                                        0  4  0
  Pro a handell for _cattan_                              0  2  0
  Pro cordes for the handell                              0  4  0
  Pro 2 bras buttons on the side handell called _menuque_ 0  1  3
  Pro a hilt for the _cattan_                             0  1  5
  Pro workmanshipp handell                                0  1  0
  Pro making cleane Sr. Tho. Smiths _cattans_             0  1  0

          Som totall                                      2  0  8


_January 25._--In respect of Japon feast, we ment to send out the
_Advize_ to morrow; which coming to knowledg of the marreners, they
came all in a troupe, the carpenter being ringleader, to ask 2 months
wagis, saying they would not way ancor till they had it; and that
mutenose fello told Mr. Totton to his face that when he came to sea
he wold trym seales backward, and yet he hath receved, as per pursers
book, above two therds of his wagis due to hym, contrary to order.

_January 26._--We thought to have sent out the ship _Advize_ to Cochi
this mornyng, because the greate feast or new yeare of Japon begineth
to morrow, which contyneweth 15 daies (as the lyke order is in China),
but, wind being contrary, could not.

And I sent these presentes following for new years gifts:

2 barills singe wyne, of 50 _gants_ barell, with 2 greate fishes, to
king.

2 barll. singe wyne, of 25 _gants_ barell, and 2 fishes to Bongo Same.
The like to Oyen Dono. The lyke to Taccamon Dono. The lyke to Semi
Dono. The lyke to Gonosque Dono. The lyke to Andrea Dittis, China Capt.

The tyme of Japon feast beginyng to morrow, we adventurd to cary out
the _Advize_, but could get no ferther then the Tabilo, and there came
to an ancor.

And I thought good to note downe that Mr. Nealson fell a quarreling
abord with me, being in his potts, as ordenary he is, telling he
scorned to write or coppie out accompts under any man, and upon terms
fell out with Mr. Wickham, whoe tould me that the said Wm. Nealson
had written a scandalous letter to Sr. Tho. Smith, taxing me of
insuffitientie in accompt keeping, extoling hym selfe that he did all,
which is a notorious sclander, he doing nothing but write per coppie as
I apointed hym.

_January 27._--Oyen Dono came to vizet me and brought me 2 gilded pay
pins.

We sent out these presents following, viz. 2 barells _singe_, 2 fishes,
to Sangero Same. The lyke to Xaxma gentellman. The lyke to Goto
_bongew_. The lyke to Unagense Dono. The like to Sugean Dono. The lyke
to Soyemon Dono. The lyke to Tozayemon Dono.

_January 28._--I sent these presentes following, viz.:--

  2 barilles wyne and 2 fishes to Sugian Donos father, of Umbra. The
  like to Yasimon Dono.
  1½ _tatta._ black cloth to a China of Langasaque emploid about trade.
  1¼ _tatta._ dito to the kinges chamberlen.
  1¼ _tatt._ black cloth to Sifian Dono, sea _bongew_.
  1¼ ditto to other sea _bongew_.
  1¼ _tatta._ dto. to Fesque Dono, our _bongew_.
  2 barill wyne, 4 fishes, to Yasimon Dono.
  1 barill wyne, 2 fyshes, to the userer.
  2 barll. wyne, 4 fyshes, to Skidayen Donos wife.

And there was presentes brought to me, viz.:--

  The baker, a small _barso_ wyne and 12 loves bread.
  Toraga, a small _barso_ wyne and a banket egges and other thinges.
  The skullion, a small _barso_ wyne, 2 fyshes.
  Skeete, a small _barso_ wyne, 2 fyshes and orenges.
  Jeffery, 2 bottells wyne and orenges.
  Jenkyn, the lyke.

I gave Mon a _keremon_ of silke, a pere _tabis_, and a gerdell.

_January 29._--The king sent me a buck, skyn and all.

This day a bark was cast away coming from Ishew, with 23, and as others
say 29, people in it, men and women, all drownd. The men came to doe
homadg to the king this feast.

_January 30._--I sent Mr. Wickham to take leave of the king, for that
he was going to Bantam, as also to thank hym for the veneson he sent
me; but the kyng was sick and could not be spoake withall.

And I delivered my letters for to goe in the _Advise_ to Mr. Ric.
Wickham, viz.:--

  1 to Worll. Company, copie of former in _Thomas_.
  2 to Sir Tho. Smith, ditto.
  1 to Generall Keeling, ditto.
  1 to Capt. Jno. Jourden, ditto.
  1 to Richard Row, dated this day.
  1 to Harnando Ximenes, ditto, with 2 from Toraja.

Mr. Wickham had my salt silver and gilt salt seller, containing 13{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE EIGHTH~} R.
8., put into cargezon goodes.

_January 31._--Mr. Wickham left his gerle woman with Matt[inga] and
gave her 2 bars plate, containing 8 _ta._, upon acco. her diet.

I went abord with Mr. Wickham to take my leave. And as we past the Duch
howse they shott of 3 chambers. And Mr. Leanord, the Cape merchant,
came after in a boate with a present, _nifon cantange_, to byd hym
farewell, as Capt. Adames did the lyke with 2 barell wyne and hense.
So at departure we had 7 peces ordinance. But I had som wordes with
some Japons which said our men owed them money; but I caused them to be
turned ashore without payment, as being bawds and knaves. But the tyde
being contrary and night coming on, the shipp did not departe.

_February 1._--I sent China Capt. wife a perfumed gilded fan.

The ship _Adviz_ put to sea this mornyng with a fresh gale, wynd at N.
Easterly; and shot afe 3 pec. ordinance at departure. God send her a
prosperous voyage, Amen.

There came a Scotsman from Langasaque to have sought passage in our
shipp to goe to his cuntrey. He was lefte behinde out of the greate
shipp in Xaxma.

Albartus the Duchman came from Miaco to Firando, and brought his woman
and child with hym, he not being permitted to stay any longer above.
He brought me a letter from Maguafen Dono, our host of Miaco, with 2
others from Mr. Wickham and Mr. Eaton, with 2 candelsticks and a duble
salt of copper or brasse gilt, one candlestick being furnished with a
lampe, a snuffe or place for candell, and a peare of extinguishers.

_Febrary 2._--The Scottsman which came out of Spanish shipp is called
Henry Shankes, and is a guner per his profession and out of money and
aparell. Soe, upon his humble petition and by generall consent, we took
hym into the English howse and geve hym meate and drink till we can
otherwais provide to send hym for his cuntrey.

Unagense Dono sent me a present as followeth, viz. 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2
greate _muches_, 2 wild ducks, and a quantety Japon potta rootes.

_Febrary 4._--We reconed with Capt. Adames for his sallary since he
entred into the Wor. Companies servis, viz.:--

                                                       _ta. m. co._
  Pro 3 yeares and one month, begyning the 24th
   November, 1613, and ending the 24th December,
   1616, at 100_l._ str. per anno., amontes unto       1233  3  3

  More per 36 Rs. 8 lent Jno. Ferrers at Syam,
   for which I answer hym, is Japon plate              0028  8  0

         Som totall owing unto him                     1262  1  3

And he is paid as followeth, viz.:

  Per 15 bars Coban gould, paid per Mr. Eaton at
    Edo at 65 _mas_ Coban, is                          0097  5  0

  Per money owing me, 2 for one from Syam              0160  0  0

  Per a junck belonging to Giquan, sould to Capt.
    Adames for the som of                              0700  0  0

  Per 3 barilles _morofack_, as it cost                0003  0  0

  Per chint bramport 1 pec.       4_ta._ 0_m._ 0_co._} 0006  0  0
    And rumall chint bram. 1 pec. 2      0     0     }

  Per 34 fysh skins, 10 R. 8, pd. Mr. Hunt             0008  0  0

  Per 1 bare plate, containing 2_ta._ 5_m._ 0_co._, with
    103 _gantes_ rise, delivered to his friend per his
    order, the rise pd. to Jno. Pheby, 1_ta._ 5_m._ 8_co._,
    is all                                             0004  1  3

                                                       0978  6  3
   So restes due to ballance his accº.                 0283  5  0

                                                       1262  1  3


_Febrary 5._--I gave one of my best _keremons_, which themperour gave
me, to the China Capt., he asking it to send into China about busynes.

And the Chinas came to the English howse with a hobby horse, or rather
a tiger play, with actes of activety, many of them coming together. So
it was thought fyt to send them somthing.

_Febrary 6._--There was a bar plate, containing 4 _tais_ 2 _condrins_,
geven to the Chinas tiger players, in respect they were Chinas and sent
to the English howse.

_Febrary 7._--The King of Firando went for the bath at Ishew, and as he
past per Holland howse they shot afe 5 chambers.

The China Capt. invited all the English to supper this night, where we
were well feasted.

_Febrary 8._--Yewkyn Dono of Shashma sent me a present of 20 birdes,
viz. wood pigions, larkes, thrushes, and gren plovers, with 2 _barsos_
wyne.

Capt. Adames had news his junck was arived at Sotto,[237] 15 leagues
hence.

Mr. Totton fell into an extreme payne of puntos (or stiches), soe that
we thought he would presently have dyed.

_Febrary 10._--Capt. Adames junck came in this day about nowne, and the
Hollanders shot affe 3 chambers as she passed by. I went abord with a
present in a banketing box of a henne, a duck rosted, with sweetmeates,
_nifon cantange_, and 2 bottelles _moroeffack_, a _barso_ of _singe_,
and 3 loves bread, to welcom Yasimon Dono, which Capt. Adames and he
took in kynd part. Our _foyfoney_ went to Shashma with the rest to toe
her hither; but all the rest of the boates are com, only no news of
her, which som take she is cast away, but I rather think it lasines.

Gorezano, our _jurebasso_ that was, seeing I ment to put hym away, sent
many to entreate for hym, which, seeing he could not preveale, went
to Semi Dono to complaine, saying I gave it out that the king ment to
banish hym out of Firando. Whereupon Semi Done sent 2 men to know yf I
had geven out any such speeches; which I retorned hym answer I did not,
only I tould Gorezano that, yf he receaved any favor from the kyng, it
was for my sake (as being my _jurebasso_), and not for his owne. Also
I sent hym word I offred to take all the tymbers and knees which were
brought in my abcense (allthough they came out of tyme when the shipps
were provided) at a reasonable rate as they were worth, which the
_bongews_ denyed. And I went my selfe to Oyen Dono and tould hym the
lyke, as also what passed tuching Goresano. Unto which he made answer
that the kyng knew nothing of these matters, which, yf he did, the
_bongews_ would have no thank for their labors, and for Goresano, all
men knew his bad tong and that I had saved his life.

_Febrary 11._--Our _foyfone_ retorned to Firando this day in the after
nowne, it haveing byn 19 daies since she departed from the junck, which
(as they say) was by meanes of a leake she fell in per meanes of the
extreme fowle wether.

_Febrary 12._--I sent Gorezano word to avoid out of our howse, for that
I would have Mr. Totton to lodg theare, to the entent to make cleane
the _fro_ against the Kyng of Xaxma com, it being geven out he will com
ashore at Firando and vizet our English howse, etc. And sowne after
Goresano came to me, telling me he was ready to departe out of our
howse, yet seemed, to be angrey; and amongst other wordes (in presence
of Mr. Osterwick) tould me that he could speake somthing of Mr. Eaton,
but that he was loath to geve discontent. But I willed hym to say on.
And was, that at Miaco one night Mr. Eaton, haveing drunk hard, tould
hym that he would stay no longer in Japon, because the Emperour had
taken our previleges from us; and that yf thenglish went out of Japon
they would take all the junckes and shipping, that non should com into
this place. I asked him whie he did not speake of this matter before
Mr. Eaton went to Syam. He answerd he was then loath to meddell in such
matters. But I replied that I esteemd he lyed in this matter, as well
as in others, telling hym that Mr. Eaton could not determen of any
going out of the cuntrey, I being his comander and over all the rest of
the English nation. He replied it was true. In fine, he is an envious
knave; so I bad hym doe his worst, assuring hym the least Englishmans
word in Japon would be belived before his. He tould me he feared not
the King of Firando, for that he could not use justice against hym, he
being servant to Chubio Dono.

_Febrary 13._--I borrowed one thousand five hundred _tais_ of Unquan
the China and others, to pay the China Capt. This to be paid with 20
per cento intrest per my bill.

_Febrary 14._--Sinze, our barkman, brought me a present of a _barso_
wyne and 2 fyshes, desyring me to chang his name, according to order of
Japon, which is held a greate honer amongst them. So the China Capt.
sayid it was good to call hym Sinemon Dono.

_Febrary 17._--I delivered tow bills unto the China Capt., viz. one
of 2000 _tais_ plate fyne, payable to Capt. Whaw at a yeare from 6th
January last, with 20 per cento intrest; the other of 1000 _tais_ same
plate, payable to Gauquan, a China [at] Langasaque, same intrest and
same tyme.

_Febrary 18._--Capt. Adames tould me that the King of Firando had sent
hym a sharp letter, because he did repare his junck and took no tymber
of hym, saying he would not let hym have carpenters henceforward. Unto
which he retorned answer that he had the Emperours passe to doe what he
did, so that yt were good he took heed how he proceaded herein. Yt is
thought Semidone settes on the symple _tono_.

_Febrary 25._--Ther was a bark set on fyre in Firando per neclegence
of them which trymbd her, and had lyke to have set the east parte of
the towne on fyre, had I not sent 12 men with bucketes at first, which
staid the fury of the fyre and quenched the fyre being entred into a
thatched howse of office.

_Febrary 26_ (_1 Ninguach_).--Mr. Nealson going a walking, per chance
fownd an alter of the ancient god Priapus (or the lecheros god) ...
whereunto women goe on pilgremadge ... as well women that are with
child, to have speedy deliverance, as also them which are barren, to be
frutefull.... I remember, when I was in France, and passing thorow the
landes betwixt the citties of Bourdeaulx and Bayon, I had knowledg of
an imag and altar, whereon stood a pickture ... which, as I remembor,
they called St. Puchin, to which all baron women went on pilgremage,
to the entent to prove frutefull, and to that entent scraped affe a
littell ... and put it into wyne and drunck it, per which meanes they
verely beleeved they should be frutefull.

_Marche 1_ (4th of _Ninguach_).--A Byskan called Antony desird to have
a man of his to goe in our _foyfone_ for Langasaque, which I promysed
hym; but, as I was enformed after, it was Appollenaria, the fryre,
which thought to have gon in her, but would not com in sight because I
should not see hym.

_Marche 2._--I receved 3 letters this day, viz.:--

1 from Safian Dono, in answer of myne I wrot hym, with a letter to King
of Cochinchina in our behalfe, to send with Capt. Adames.

1 other from his secretary, in answer of an other I wrot hym, and how
his master had performed all I requested, he soliceting hym thereunto.

In fine both very frendly letters.

1 from our host Tozayemon Dono, that the boates our goodes went up in
came so late that he could make no seales, and therefore, yf he brought
money along with hym, it must be borowed, and that he was ready to com
for Firando.

_Marche 3._--Gorezano, our quandum _jurebasso_, came with our hostes
man and shewed me a letter, wherin a frend of his wrote hym that the
Duch host at Miaco was put into prison for letting Albartus lye so long
in his howse, contrary to the Emperours edict. This knave did seeme to
rejoyce thereat.

Capt. Speck arived from Xaxma this day towardes night, and had many
guns, or chambers, shot afe at his landing.

_Marche 5._--We reared our pigion howse this day.

And towards night our host Tozayemon Dono of Sackay arived heare, but
(as he tells me) hath not brought a peny of money, as not haveing
sould any of our goodes. But I think he maketh use of it to send for
Cochinchina, and I dowbt not without councell of Capt. Adames.

_Marche 6._--I sent Ed. Sayer with a _jurebasso_ to Oyen Dono, to
desyre hym to speake to the king to helpe us with som money, in respect
we have such neede. He sent me answer he made accompt the king would
be heare to night, and that at his coming he would enform hym thereof,
saying I had greate reason in my demand.

_Marche 7._--The King of Firando arived from Ishew in the after nowne.
So I went out in a boate and met hym, as many of Firando did the lyke;
and the Hollanders shot affe 9 chambers or bases as he passed by, but
went not out to meete hym, for that Capt. Speck and Albartus were gon
to Langasaque the day before. I carid a banketing box with preserved
nutmeg, conserve of roses, a box of marmelad, and a marchpaine,[238]
with 2 bottelles Spa. wyne, and a barill _morofack_, but went not
abord the kinges bark, he not calling, but sent it home after hym, the
_jurebasso_ remeanyng theare an hower or 2, as others did the lyke, and
were put affe for recept till the morrow after.

_Marche 8._--Bongo Samas man came to me and tould me, as it were in
secret, that he heard his master say that the king his nephew was
offended against me, but he knew not well the occation, except it were
for that I went not to vizet hym at Ishew, or else for bringing Capt.
Adames junck ashore without asking leave. To the first I answerd that I
could not think the king looked for homadg from me as from his vassals,
and that my busynes was such as I could not goe, and therfore had wrot
hym a letter to same effect, signefying of my gladnes to heare that he
fownd the bathes to his content. And for the junck it was none of myne,
but belonged to Capt. Adames, whome asked leave before he dockt her.
In fyne, this kyng is a symple man and led per bad councell, and so I
think it will prove in the end. I am of opinion that Goresano, our late
_jurebasso_, is a whitston to egg hym on against us.

_Marche 9._--I went and vizeted the kyng, and carid hym 2 barilles
wyne, 12 wood pigions, and 5 roles bread; and Capt. Adames carid hym 2
barilles and certen stickes dryd fysh. And, amongst other matters, I
desird leave to have laid handes one the scrivano of the junck which
Mr. Saris came in from Syam, he being now com to towne as I understand.
The kyng willed me to know the howse where he lodged, and that he would
cause order geven to stay hym; which I did lear[n]e out and sent hym
word thereof. And Capt. Adames desired the kynges letter of favor to
the King of Cochinchina; which he promised hym.

_Marche 11._--The scrivano of the junck Ed. Sayer came in from Syam
sent me word he was contented to deliver all matters into my handes,
with the billes and writinges of Giquan the dead capt.; but, as it is
said, he hath opened the dead mans chistes (6 in number), and taken out
what his [he?] list, and now would deliver the emptie chistes to me.
So I sent hym word he should deliver an accompt of all to Capt. Andrea
Dittis in this place, or to Capt. Whaw, his brother, at Langasaque,
and I would take an acco. at their handes. This scrivano made sute to
Yasimon Dono to take up this matter, and he would geve hym the half of
the 140 _picols_ wood in sute.

_Marche 12._--I wrot 2 letters to Taccamon Dono and Semi Dono, and
sent each of them a paper containing the truth of my plito with the
scrivano. Taccamon Dono was within, but would not speake with Mr.
Nealson, whome I sent, nor receve my letter nor petition, but sent them
back per our _jurebasso_.

_Marche 13._--I went to Taccamon Dono in company of Capten Adames, and
carid hym a barill wyne and 2 fyshes, _nifon catange_, and delivered
hym my letter and paper consernyng my procese against the purcer, which
he took in good parte, promising me justice when he had heard what the
other cold aledg against me, but sent home the barill wyne and fyshes
after me, for that no present was to be accepted when men came to crave
justice.

_Marche 14._--A comon _caboque_ or Japon play was sent out and alowed
for 7 daies space, at 2 _condrins_ each one that entered, etc.

The King of Firando set a tax upon all his vassales, to make hym
amongst them 3000 _taies_ in money, and to take ryse of hym at a deare
rate in paymt., to make money to carry his charges up for Edo. And,
amongst the rest, certen were taxed at a hier rate then the rest,
because they provided us tymber, bisquite, and other matters at a lower
rate then the king liked of, not asking hym leave. This is thought
to be donne per the councell of Semi Done, whome is very much hated
therefore of the comune people.

_Marche 15._--I had answer from Syen Dono, the governour, that the king
could helpe us now with no money, for that he was put to his shiftes to
provid money to goe to Edo. The Hollanders were answered as we were.

The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, tould me in secret that the King of
Firando had sent a ruch _cattan_ for a present to his brother Whow, to
make accoyntance, to the entent to borow money, and that his brother
had promised to lend hym 2000 _taies_; so that at instant the king sent
for 300 _taies_, he wanting 150 of that som willed me to borow so much
of Tozayemon Dono for 10 or 15 daies, to pay intrest.

_Marche 17._--Mr. Nealson being ill at ease went to the bath at Ichew,
and Jno. Cook with hym. God send them their healths.

_Marche 18._--Taccamon Dono sent word to Yasimon Dono, that the
scrivano of the junck Ed. Sayer came in had put up a petition against
hym for delivering the 140 _picos_ sappon into my handes, before the
matter was ended by justice. So I gave a writing under my hand to save
hym harmles, both against the justis and scrivano, whatsoever they
would demand of hym tuching that matter. And after came an other hu and
cry (as the proverb is) that the justice would not let Yasimon Dono goe
on the voyag, except I delivered the 140 _piculls_ wood into his handes
till the matter was ended per justice.

Whereupon I went to the king, in company of Capt. Adames, and with much
ado carid the said Yasimon Dono along with us to make complaint to the
king. But, when we came theare, he would not per any meanes the king
should know of the matter, whereby we perceved he was consorted with
the said scrivano to parte stakes with hym.

_Marche 19._--Capt. Adames went out with his junck to Cochi, and soe to
put to sea, and shot affe 3 chambers as he passed per the Duch howse,
and they answered with the lyke and, when he was past, shot affe a pece
ordinance with shott.

Capt. Adames host Yasimon Dono plaid the gemeny with hym to day,
sending one to hym to tell hym he must com to the king, but after
proved to be to the 10 of the streete, about wood staid from the _tico_
of our junck he came in from Syam; but he answered them he had nothing
to doe in the matter, refering them to me.

The Capt. China sent a bar plate to Capt. Adames and an other to
Yasimon Dono his host, for a present at their farewell. Soe after nowne
the junck put to sea towardes Cochinchina. God send them a prosperous
voyage.

I delivered a memoriall to Ed. Sayer with a cargezon goodes, viz.:--

                                                    _ta.   m. co._
  Broad cloth, amonting to Japon plate               0278  3  7½
  Bayes, amonting to same plate                      0144  7  0
  Cambaia cloth, to                                  0052  8  0
  Russia hides, 48                                   0144  0  0
  Gad stille, 120 _cattis_ Japon wight, cost str.
   in England                                        0007  9  0-10/17
  Fowling peces, 20:9 damasked and 11 chast, cost    0095  6  0
  Ellophans teeth, 30, containing 1130 _cattis_,
   cost in Eng.                                      0488  2  8-19/102
  Copper _goces_, 21 _picull_, at 6_ta._ 5_m._
   5_co._ _pico_                                     0137  5  5
  Table bookes, severall sortes                      0011  6  0
  Looking glasses, 8, cost                           0025  6  0
  Knyves, 2 sortes, cost four dozen                  0007  8  5
  Amber beades, 12 _cattis_, 2 sortes                0118  6  2
  Diaper, 9 peces; Holland cloth, 14 peces;
   Sleze land, 18 peces, cost                        0097  8  8
  Armors, 2, with 1 head pez, cost                   0006  0  0
  Galepotes; 1 chist, No. 8; divers sortes, cost     0009  1  2½
  Gales,[239] 1 sack, containing 1 _picull_, cost    0015  7  3½
  Rise for victuling, 8 sackes, cost                 0006  6  6{~VULGAR FRACTION TWO THIRDS~}
  Money, 150 Rs. of 8, amontes to          120 0 0 }
  With 084:9:1½ _condrin_ plate bars, is   084 9 1½} 0208  0  9½
  With 003:1:8 charges copper              003 1 8 }

  Som totall cargezon to Syam amontes unto           1856  3 8-2295/5202


Also I delivered a memoriall to Capt. Adames, as apereth per coppie in
book cargesons, with that to Ed. Sayer.

Unagense Dono sent me a quarter of wild boare for a present.

_Marche 22._--Capt. Adames, fynding contrary wyndes at sea, retorned
this night past to Cochi in Firando, from whence he wrot me a letter
per Mr. Sayer of what past, namely, that after I departed from hym the
19th currant, being under seale, Yasimon Dono espied a bark coming
after them with a cloth seale, desiring him to stay for her, which
he did, coming to an ancor. In which boate came 2 of Yasimon Donos
brother in lawes, with littel Anthony, _alius_ Sifian Dono, who at the
first entry abord laid hold on Capt. Adames armes and, before he was
aware, wrong hym in such extreme sort that he put hym to much payne;
and another of his followers laid hold on the busom of Jno. Pheby his
boteswaine, one secondyng hym with his arme out of his _keremon_ as
though he would have cut hym; and on of Yasimon Donos brother in lawes
laid hand on the hinder part of the haire of Mr. Sayer--all passing in
as violent sort as might be; which moved Capt. Adames to fetch out the
Emperours passe, kissing it and houlding it up over his head, meanyng
to protest and take witnesse of the violence they offered hym. But his
merchantes perswaded hym to the contrary; and soe the asselants gott
them on a sudden downe in to Yasimon Donos cabben, and sowne after
packed ashore, not speaking to Capt. Adames.

So I sent Mr. Osterwick abord with a letter to Capt. Adames, with a
barrill wyne and 6 hense, advizing hym that, yf he pleased, I would
bring the matter in question before the king, yf he please.

_Marche 23._--Mr. Osterwick retorned from Capt. Adames, who set seale
this mornyng betymes. God speed them well. He tells me that Capt.
Adames desired me not to bring the matter of his abuse offerd per
Antony and his crew in question till his retorne; only I might geve
out som speeches, that it might come to the kinges eares, yf I could
conveniently do it.

_Marche 24._--I sent Mr. Osterwick to the rendadors (or mint men) with
two barill of _morofack_ and 2 fyshes, _nifon catange_, to tell them
that the purcer of Capt. Adames junck tould me that they sent to me to
know what plate or money we sent in the same junck, which I gave them
notis of, assuring them that we sent out no _fibuck_, but observed the
Emperours edict; but, when we had occation to melt money, I would send
for them, etc. So, presently after, they came to the English howse,
haveing first sent back the present, aleadging their master had warned
them not to receve any present. Soe I made them colation, and so they
departed.

Also I went to Taccamon Dono, and carid hym the coppies of the 2 billes
for 27 _cattis_ plate, delivered Giquan the China capt. to buy sappon,
for which the scrivano was bound to deliver me 922 _picos_ in Japon,
whereof I wanted 212 _picos_.

It seemed to me that Taccamon Dono took the parte of the scrivano over
much, wishing me to geve hym the halfe of the 140 _picos_ sapon I had
in my power, and that he should deliver me all the writinges and goodes
which belonged to the dead Capt. Giquan. Unto which I answered I was to
demand 115 _picos_ more, which he had delivered to marenars in Xaxma
without any order to show for it and per force contrary to Mr. Sayers
will. In fine, he willed me to talke with the China Capt. about the
matter that all might be delivered into my handes, and I to geve hym a
quitance for all, that the Chinas should not molest hym hereafter. So
it seemeth to me this mans fist is greased.

_Marche 26._--Capt. Speck retorned from Langasaque, and I sent Mr.
Osterwick to vizet hym and bid hym welcom hom. He tould Mr. Osterwick
he had spent both tyme and money as well at Langasaque as at Shashma,
and yet could get no justice, which, as it should seeme, mooves his
patience, as also the slow payment of this _tono_ of Firando, which he
fyndeth as well as we, etc.

Here is flying reportes geven out that wars are like to ensue in Japon;
but what will com of it God he knoweth; only I dowbt the projectes or
secret insynewations of the fryres, jesuistes, and pristes, whoe have
over free entrance to this _tono_ of Firando, and not unlyke they may
have the lyke to others more greater then he. God grant all may fall
out for the best. Amen.

They tell of a yong man that is much sought after for being on Fidaia
Sammas part, but still escapeth per papistes secret conveances.

_Marche 27._--Soyamon Dono sent for our _jurebasso_ to speak with
hym, who fownd Semi Dono with hym, and they sent me word that, yf any
timbers were lost, I should pay for them, and that the king merit to
desire of themperour, at his going up, to have the Hollanders and us
to goe to som other place, for that he was awery of us and of our
proceadinges.

_Marche 28._--I went and vizeted Capt. Speck and tould hym what
Semidone sent me word of, that the King of Firando would demand of
the Emperour to have us sent out of Firando to dwell elsewhere. To
the which Capt. Speck answerd that it might be we might be the first
demanders for that matter, telling me he thought it was best he and I
went together to Semidone, to know whereupon he sent such word.

I wrot 2 letters to Neyemon Dono and his partner, with one for Mrs.
Adames, all for Edo; and another both in Spanish and Japons to Tome
Dono, _jurebasso_ to Massamone Samme, to adviz hym we shall have
occation to use hym at our going next to Edo in August next, to be
_jurebasso_ to the Emperour.

_Marche 31._--Harry Shank retorned from Langasaque, and brought 3 vyne
trees with 14 other frute trees, dyvers sortes, with some garden seeds,
and a little franincense to perfume the piginhowse.

I sent Mr. Osterwick to Semidone to tell hym the price I ment to geve
for the tymber; but he entred into a passionate humor. He is a proud,
beggerly, presumptious fello.

_Aprill 2._--We bought 2 frute trees, 1 oreng and the other peares, for
4 _mas_.

Ther was a junck of China, which went out of Langasaque and bound for
Cagallon in the Phillippinas, put back to Firando in the roade of Cochi
per meanes of bad weather at sea.

_Aprill 3._--I paid the gouldsmith 1½ _mas_ for making me a silver
instrument for my salvatory.

Capt. Speck sent Jacob Suager to vizet me. But I take it to be
underhand, to know whether I would have acepted of his offer to have
byn umper in the price of my tymber; but I said nothing to hym, nether
did he speake of it to me.

A China shewmaker died on a sudden, being well not halfe an hower
before.

_Aprill 4._--Thomas the cook, lefte to attend on Mr. Totton, being a
harebreand felloe, threw a kitchen knyfe at Balle, the kynges dogg,
which we kept in the English howse, and stuck hym to the hart that he
fell downe dead presently. He hath beaten many of our Japon servantes,
and had lyke to have kild one of our neighbors servantes the other
day. He ys not the man I took hym for, and wrot the Worll. Company in
his behalfe more then he deserveth. Yf this had hapned in the tyme of
Foyne Samme, who esteemed this dogg much, yt might have cost us all our
lives. I sent our _jurebasso_ to exskewse the matter to the kyng, who
sent me word he esteemed that the English man did it not of purpose,
and therefore willed me not to punish hym, for the deede being donne
could not be undon, etc.

_Aprill 6._--There is news geven out that an embassador from Corea is
to goe to the Emperour and is expected shortly to passe by Ishew.

_Aprill 7._--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Semidone to tell hym that, in
respect he took the matter in hand, I was content to geve 50 _tais_
more in the whole for the tymber, that is, whereas I offred but 270
_taies_ before, I will make it up 320 _taies_ to geve the king content,
etc. And he retorned me answer that I did offer well, and cowncelled me
to goe to the king. I think the Hollanders play the jemenis, and goe
underhand to buy the tymber when it is at the lowest.

_Aprill 8._--I went to the king to tell hym bow his _bungews_ would
force me to take tymber at the price they pleased, I not haveing bought
any of them, nether they bringing it in tyme to serve our shiping,
as also that I could have no end of the procese with the theevish
scrivano, although I had papers to show for what I asked. But the king
sufferd me to stand, without attending, an howre, and in the end would
not tarry to here me speake, but bad me confer with his _bongews_. Soe
I went from thence to Oyen Dono and tould hym what past. He gave me
councell to make an end of that matter of the tymber at what price I
could bring them to, for have it I must; but for that of the scrivano,
he thought the king would see me have my right.

The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, envited the king to dyner, with most
of the nobles; yf a king and nobles a man may call them, I fynding no
noblenes amongst them.

_Aprill 10._--Mr. Nealsons boy Larrance ran away, because he did beate
hym, which to say the truth be doth over much; yet the boy is the best
boy in the howse. But after, he was brought back by his parentes and
left with his master.

There came 2 or 3 Chinas to see our English howse, men of esteeme, and
one of them a doctor of phisick, unto whome I geve kynd entertaynment.
And one of them sent me a box of comfets afterwards for a present,
thanking me for their good entertaynment.

_Aprill 11._--Tonomon Samme, the kinges eldest brother, arived this
day after dyner at Firando from the Emperours court. The Hollanders
discharged 3 chambers at his passing by. And sowne after I went and
viseted hym, and carid a present of 2 barilles wyne and 3 cases _mach_,
containing 10 in each case; which he took in good parte. I fownd hym
accompanid with Semidone, Sangero Samme, and all the rest of the
caveleros in towne.

_Aprill 13._--The China Capt. came and tould me he had receved a letter
from his brother Whaw, from Langasaque, how themperour of Japon had
sent out a bark, well manned with above 100 men, for the cost of China,
wherin went 30 gentellmen with a letter and present of worth for the
Emperour of China, as 10 rich _cattans_ garnished with hiltes and other
necessares of gould, with many pikes after same sort, and 2000 _taies_
in bars of silver, so that they canot tell what to judg of the matter;
only they think the Emperour of China will accept of nothing which
cometh from them, the hatred betwixt them is soe greate.

We dyned at Holland howse, Mr. Nealson, Mr. Osterwick and my selfe,
where we had greate cheare, both first, second, and therd course, and
had no want of Spanish wyne, with drinking of healths to the Kinges
Matie. and Queene of England, with the Grave Mouris and States.

_Aprill 15._--Towardes night the Kyng of Goto sent two of his cheefe
men to me with a present, he being newly retorned from the Emperours
court, viz. 2 barrilles wyne, 14 legges of pouldren venison, 10
great salt fyshes, 3 hand guns or calivers of Japon; offring me much
frendship, yf our shiping chanced to put into any of his portes, as
also to furnish them with tymber or any other matter they stood in need
of, at as loe a rate as we could have it in any other parte of Japon.

_Aprill 16._--Towardes night word came on a sudden that the King of
Xaxma passed by and ment not to com to an ancor. Soe I provided a
present and went out to meete hym. The King of Firando went out to meet
hym and sent out his brother before, whoe met with us in the way and
willed me to stay till the king his brother had been abord, and then
deliver our present; which I ment to have donne, whether he had spoaken
or no, and soe I tould hym. Yt seemeth he hath noe greate good will
to the King of Firando, for he had but a word or 2 with hym, and so
let hym departe, but kept me in talke allmost an hower, asking me many
questions and offring me any frendship his cuntry did afford or that we
stood in need of.

Capt. Speck went not to vizet hym, whatsoever the occation was; whereat
som exceptions were taken, and, as we retorned, on of the barkes of
Xaxma made signes to me to come abord, thinking we had byn Hollanders,
and, seeing we were not, sent a letter by me to deliver to Capt. Speck,
which at my coming ashore I sent unto hym.

_Aprill 17._--Ike Dono came to me this mornyng, as he went to the
kyng, and tould me the King of Xaxma axcepted my present in good sort
and spake much good of our nation. He also tould me that the other 2
did expect to have had something, so, per his councell, we cut out 2
vestes, black cloth, and 2 whole peeces chint bramport and sent to them.

_Aprill 18._--I paid the gouldsmith for seting me a burning glas in a
silver frame 1½ _mas_, and the frame waid 3 _mas_ 8 _condrins_.

Semidone sent me a bill to set my hand unto, to pay the king 450
_taies_ for the tymber we bought of hym. I receved a letter from
Cacamon Dono, secretary to Oyen Dono, the Emperours secretary at Edo: a
frendly letter.

_Aprill 19._--The king banished Sangero Samme, his uncle by a Corean
woman, out of Firando, to live in a village in this island, 5 leagues
from Firando. This Sangero was Sonne to Foyne Samme in his ould adge by
a Corean woman, and at his death he left hym 800 _gocos_ of rise per
anno. But he was no sowner dead, but the kyng, his nephew, shortned hym
to 250 _gocos_ per anno, and now hath taken occation to confine hym in
this sort, because he dispiseth his wife, a noble woman of Crates, and
goeth after other women ... geveing them greate presentes, bringing hym
selfe into debt. This is the common report.

A _boz_ of Crates came to see the English howse, and envited hymselfe
to our _fro_ with other _bozes_ of Firando.

_Aprill 20._ Easterday.--One of Towans sonns, of Langasaque, came
secretly to see the English howse, but I was enformed per one of our
servantes whoe he was, and soe gave hym the best entertaynment I could.
This Towan is held to be the richest man in Japon, and com up of base
parentage by his subtill and craftie wyt.

We had the Hollanders to dynner and our nighbours to supper.

_Aprill 21._--I went to Semidone and carid hym a _barso_ of wyne and 4
string of drid cuttell, and thanked hym for the paynes taken about the
tymber. I also towld hym I marveled at the presumptious speeches of
that Miguell the _tico_, who gave it out he would kill some Englishman,
I haveinge before payd hym all he could demand, to a _condrin_ of
sappon, before the kinges _bongews_; so that I wished hym to look
to that theefe and his companion, that they went not abroad to doe
mischeefe, but that they might be carid to Miaco to answer it with
their lives before Ingo Dono. At the which he seemed at first to be
mooved, yet after he said the king ment to goe up within 8 or 10 daies,
and that, yf I would send a man with them, he would cary them up in
bonds and deliver them to the justice, which I was contented withall.
So after, I sent to Takamon Dono, cheefe justice, to signefie as much
to hym; and he sent me word he thought it would be long before the king
went up, and that it was better I sent them up sowner. But I answerd
I had no such hast, nether was I willing to seek justice in an other
place, yf I could have it heare; and to same effect sent word to Oyen
Dono, the kinges governor.

_Aprill 22._--I thought good to note downe how the Kinge of Firando,
above a yeare past, sent me word he would geve me a howse rent free,
which Matinga dwelled in, it being a matter of some 10 shilling or 2
_taies_ per anno, but now goeth from his word and denieth it.

_Aprill 24._--I sent Mr. Osterwick to our _bongews_, which the Kyng of
Firando hath put abord our junck to see each marener have all belonged
to them, to have them put their handes to a writing of the delivery
thereof to their content; but they denid to doe it, yet by word of
mouth confessed it to be true. Thus are we used in Firando and can have
no justice, allthough we have all the right in the world.

_Aprill 25_ (first day _Singuach_).--Yt is thought fit Mr. Nealson goe
to Langasaque to complaine to the Emperours _bongew_ how we can have no
justice in Firando, and he carieth all our papers of processe against
the scrivano of the junck of the dead Capt. Giquan.

_Aprill 27._--Jno. Japon paid a _mas_ of plate to the gouldsmith for
me, for making me a Jemall gould ring.

We delivered 10 _picos_ copper to the fownders to cast bases or small
ordinance.

_Aprill 28._--Jor. Durois writes me that the Kyng of Umbra hath taken 2
padres presoners, both Japons, the one a Franciscan frire and the other
a jesuist.

_May 2._--This day is a feast in Japon, of their great profit or god,
Shaka, whoe, as they beleeve, died a month past and rose againe this
day, being the 8th of their month of Singuach. Whereupon they deck
all the eaves of their howses with greene bowes, in remembrance of
his rising from death to life. They also hold opinion that in the end
(but they know not when) that on this day he will apeare (or com) unto
them againe alive, much lyke to the Persians that look for the coming
of Mortus Ely,[240] and therfore attend his coming (as that day) with
great devotion and reverence yearly.

I understanding that the King of Firando was ready to departe to goe to
Edo, I went to vizet hym and carid a present to him, viz. 1¼ _tatta_
black cloth, 1¼ red or stamet bayes. He took it in good parte, and
wished me, when our shipps came, to send up no goodes to Osaky or
Miaco, untill the Emperour permitted. I answerd hym he needed not to
take care that I would offend in that point, for I looked so neare to
the Emperours order that I ment to have sent a man with him now to
Miaco, about the processe I had in hand, but staid till our shiping
came, because I would not in any sort infring the Emperours edict.

_May 3._--The king dyned at Shosque Dono his chamberlens howse, whoe
sent to me to desire to have a pie, a roset hen, and a duck, dressed
after our English fation, which was performed and sent to hym.

_May 4._--Semidone sent me word we would com to our English howse and
meete Capt. Speck, to examen the matter of those speeches geven out. I
retorned hym answer, yt needed not his Lordship took soe much paines
this fowle wether, but that we would com to hym; but he sent me word he
would com to me, which he performed, the Holland Capt. meeting hym. And
Semedone brought in his company Torazemon Dono and Soyemon Dono, and,
to conclud, denied all his former speeches, only he said the king took
it in ill parte I denied to sett my hand to a letter or writing that I
had sent goodes up to Tozayemon Dono of Sackay to sell for me, which I
tould hym I had reason to do, for that I sent up non but sould it in
Firando, yt being a matter against the Emperours edict to send up any
thing. They answered I had reason, yf I sould it heare, etc. Yt seemeth
Gorezano, our _jurebasso_, was a cheefe occation by means of his bad
tong, geveing out false reportes; which I will requite, yf I may.

_May 5._--I entring into consideration of the small respect this King
of Firando hath of us, in comparison of that which he had at our first
entrance into Japon, and comparing on thing with an other what might
be thoccation, and in the end finding my consience cleare that I had
geven no occation thereof, I wrot a lardg letter unto hym, openyng the
discontent I had for these six months past, in respect of the kynde
usadg we had heretofore. The coppie of which letter I have kept both
in English and Japon tong, as I sent it to hym by Mr. Jno. Osterwick.
Which letter he receaved in good parte, and retorned me a frendly
answer that he held me to be his frend from the beginning and that my
hart was true unto hym, and so should his be to me and the rest of
thenglish nation, and that I should make no dowbt thereof; yet he,
being ready to goe up to themperour, could not geve me satisfaction in
all, which he would doe at his retorne, and in the mean tyme would take
order for Miguel the _tico_.

_May 6._--The King of Firando departed towardes themperours court this
day, about nowne; and I went out with a small bark and carid hym 2
barilles wyne and 30 loves bread, and praid God send hym a good voyage.
The Hollanders shot affe 7 chambers or peces of ordinance as he passed
by, but went not out to accompany hym as they were wont to doe.

There was 30 _cattis_ tyn sent to the founders, to melt in our
ordinance of copper. So we cast 2 basses, or small peeces, with
chambers this day.

_May 9._--There is speeches geven out that the Corean embassador is
howerly looked for at Ishew, with 500 attendantes following of hym. So
the King of Firando hath geven order for receving of hym and apointed
som 20 or more of the ruchest and hansomest men in the towne to
accompany Tonoman Samme his brother as his attendantes; but at their
owne charg, to prevent cost.

_May 11._--There was news came this day of a boate of Xaxma which came
from Langasaque and took in som 10 Japon passingers to carry them to
Firando, amongst whome was a yewth whoe had som 2000 _cattis_ tobacco,
which might be worth som 4000 _mas_. For which (as it is thought)
they sett on the passingers and slue 5 of them, but, being neare the
shore on the cost of Umbra, the rest escaped and raysed the cuntrey,
whoe took one of them presently; but the rest, being 6 or 7, escaped
into the woodes, which forthwith were besett rownd about by the kinges
comandement, so that they canot escape.

Yt is said their are many of these Xaxmas in their owne cuntrey up in
swarmes and keepe the woodes, doing much mischeefe and comiting many
murthers, and canot yet be suppressed. The begyners were souldiers
which were prest to goe helpe the Emperour against Fidaia Samme (or at
least made a shew they ment to doe soe); but they coming to late, he
haveing no neede of them, they were dismist without pay, which caused
them to doe as they doe.

_May 13._--I sent a letter to Jor. Durois, with a Spanish book called
Catholico reformado.

And the fownders had 30 _cattis_ tynne more, and cast us 2 more copper
bases, same mold as the former.

_May 20._--I went and viseted Taccamon Dono, the cheefe justice, and
carid hym a present of a barill of wyne and 2 fyshes, with 2 papers
rolls of _match_, containing in each paper 10 roles. He took it in good
parte, and promised me to be ready to favour our nation in all he could.

Gorezano, our quandum _jurebasso_, came to me and tould me that he
esteemed hym selfe worthy of the 36 _tais_ od money he owed upon
rest of accompt, in respect of the service he had donne us above at
Emperours court; and in fyne tould me, yf I ment to have any thing, I
might get it by law. Also he tould me that Shosque Dono reported unto
hym that the Emperour had comanded Safian Dono to cut his bellie; but I
canot beleev it to be true, for I sent to Shosque Dono to know whether
it were so or no, and he answerd such reportes were geven out, but he
knew not whether it were true or no.

The fownders had 14 _cattis_ tyn to cast chambers for the 4 fowlers,
but wanted stuff, so one rested imperfect.

_May 21._--Speeches are geven out that the _caboques_ or Japon
players (or whores), going from hence for Tushma to meete the Corean
ambassadors, were set on by the way by a boate of Xaxma theeves, and
kild all both men and women, for the money they had gotten at Firando.

Bongo Same sent me a hanche of wild boare for a present.

_May 22._--Jor. Durois advised me that the Kyng of Umbra had put two
padres to death, viz. one a jesuist and the other a Franceskan fryre.
Also that on of the murtherers was taken which kild the Japons in the
bark, but as yet will not confes whoe were his companions.

_May 26._--We tried our 4 fowlers this day and fownd all to be good,
only the brich of ij of the chambers of one of the bigger peeces were
broaken by meanes of the iron fid which was badly made.

_May 28._--The Chinas rowed for wagers this day in boates with
paddelles, som 8 or 9 on a side, seting up a ma[r]k in the sea, and the
boate which came first at it got. This they doe upon duble occation;
the Chinas houlding on origenall and the Japons an other. This feast
begyneth the first of this month of Gonguach, and endeth 5th day, which
is to morow, which is the cheefe day both with China and Japon. And
this day in the mornyng they decked all the eaves of their howses with
green flagges (or segges) mingled with an other green herbe, which they
keepe all the yeare after, drying the said herbe, and make littell
mattches to burne their bodies, legges, or armes, or any parte wherein
they feele payne, which they doe in place of letting blood. I say,
wheare we use to lett blood upon occation to sick persons, they use to
burne them with this herbe, and esteeme that consecrated this day the
best.

And now tuching this feast of Piro (or Pilo), the Chinas hold the
origenall as followeth, viz.:--

They have it by record (or writing), as they say, that many ages past
a king of China propownded a question to his sages (or wise men),
comanding them to tell hym the truth, what thing only they esteemed the
best and most necessary upon the earth for the sustenance of mans lyfe.
And their were two only that stood in contention about the matter: the
one saying that salt was the best; and the other, suger. So the kyng
comanded to bring hym both of the on and other and made a tast of both;
and fynding the salt so unsavery in his mouth, comanded that wyse man,
which spook in praise thereof, to be cast into the say. But thereupon
grew such extreme fowle wether for a long tyme afterward, that they had
no meanes to mak salt, so that non was to be had to seazon or dres the
kinges meate. By which meanes he fownd then by experience that salt was
better then suger, and was sory he had soe unadvisedly put the other to
death. And on day, as he sat at dyner, in greate care for want of salt,
there was som fell downe upon the table, and he knew not from whence
it came. This miracle (they say) hapned the first day of Gonguach, soe
that presently the king comanded a seremony to be used upon the sea, in
memory of that man which was drownd, whose name was Piro (or Pilo), as
aforsaid. So that, as they row, at every strok of paddell they geve,
they name Pilo, they being answerd (all in one) with stroke of drum and
bras bason. So that, ever since that tyme, they never wanted salt, and
contynewally every yeare, at this tyme, use that seremony.

But they Japons howld it to be an other way, yet both agree in
the name of the man. The Japons say he was a wise man and a great
estronomer, and dwelled in an iland seperated from China, about the
cost of Camboja, and that by his learnyng he understood before hand
that the iland where he dwelt should sink into the sea, and tould they
inhabetantes thereof, willing them to make provision of boates and
shiping (in tyme) to carry them away. But they laughed hym to scorne.
Yet neverthelesse he made provition for hym selfe in tyme, and soe
escaped and came to land in another place, all the rest perishing when
the iland sunck.

_May 29._--This day was their feast of Gonguach Guench or 5th day of
5th month.

_June 3._--Word came that a bark of the China Capt. was cast away, I
dowbting it was she he went in for Langasaque; but it proved to be a
wood bark of his overladen and sunk, but no people lost.

_June 4._--Tozayemon Dono advized me that Safian Dono is at Edo and
in favor, Gonrok Dono his kinsman gon for governor to Langasaque, and
Chubio Dono his brother at bathes, all in favor, and that themperor
will be at Miaco next month.

_June 6._--It is said two more padres or papist pristes are put to
death in Umbra; and, because the people carid away the blood in
handkerchefes and clowtes of the other two executed before, he caused
these 2 to be cast into the sea, with stones tied about their necks.

_June 7._--Towardes night a man of Goto brought word how there were iij
shipps arived neare to Goto and there com to an anker; but he knew not
what they were. And about midnight Capt. Speck sent me word that the[y]
were ij greate shipps of theares com from Molucas and had taken a junck
on the cost of Manillias and brought her as prize to Japon. Also that
they had 10 greate shipps at Manillias to look out in those partes, etc.

_June 8._--The 2 Holland ships and prize came into the roade at Cochy.
It is said they have taken and spoiled all the junckes which went this
yeare for the Manillias. They confes 14 or 15 sayle, but thought to
be much more, and have burned the Spanish shipp of Don Jno. de Silva
and others, but not knowne wether they had the treasure or no. It is
esteemed their booty is greate. They say they have another junk prize
which they lost company of at sea, haveing 7 Hollander men in her and
rest Chinas above 30 or 40. So they dowbt the Chinas have kild them.
Also reportes are geven out they have taken China junkes on this cost.
In fine, yt is thought they will have trowble about taking Chinas.

_June 9._--I went abord the ij Holland shipps to Cochy, and carid each
of them a barell of wyne, a hogg, and 10 loves bread. I thought to
have fownd Capt. Speck abord, but he was gon ashore; and the King of
Firando had set a bark to watch that nothing was brought ashore. So
it is thought the Hollanders will not let their shipps nor priz junk
enter into Firando, for it is said they have robbed above 40 junkes,
and are both full laden with silk and stuffes of silk, and the priz 200
_picolles_ silk abord her.

_June 10._--The Holland marreners came ashore unknowne to the master,
and brought taffetes, sattens, damasks, muscods, and such lyke, geving
away and selling matters good cheape. The master and capt. of both
Holland shipps came ashore and went with Capt. Speck to vizet the
kinges brother, and from thence came all to thenglish howse. Capt.
Speck tould me that the kinges brother had warned them not to sell
anything till they heard answer from themperour, but might land what
they would. So this day they loaded 4 or 5 barkes with raw silk and
sent it ashore.

_June 11._--The China Capt. took a boate and went to see the junk that
the Hollanders took, wherat Capt. Speck was much offended and would
not let hym goe abord. Yet he spok to the Chinas, whoe tould hym they
shewed great cruelty to them, and were not content to take shipp and
goodes but cast them overbord, for of 270 persons that were abord
that junck they had left but 30; and, when they had taken all that
they liked out of other junkes, they sunk them with the rest, people
and all. Soe he hath taken councell with the Chinas to send up to the
Emperour to make complaint; and in the meane tyme hath sent for Gonrok
Dono, to Langasaque, to com hether.

_June 12._--I wrot 3 letters to Tozayemon Dono of Sackay, Cuimon Dono
of Osaky, and Magozemon Dono of Miaco, advising them of the arivall of
the ij Holland shipps with their priz, and delivered them to Soyemon
Dono to send up in the kinges bark which now they send up about
Hollanders matter, per which conveance the Chinas send to have remedy
against the Hollanders.

These Chinas in the junck will not be perswaded but that they are
Englishmen which took them. The reason, the Hollanders in all their
theevish proceadinges geve it out they are English.

_June 13._--Capt. Speck receved a letter that their other junk the[y]
lost in the way was arived in Xaxma. The Hollanders sett out orders
abord their shipps that the mareners should sell nothing to the
Englishmen.

_June 14._--I receved a letter from Alvaro Munos, which Capt. Speck
opened before it came to my handes, of the which I wrot hym a letter
that I took it in ill parte.

_June 17._--I sent Henry Shank iij _tais_ small plate upon a bundell
silk in pawne, to pay (as he saith) for stuffes he hath bought of
Hollanders. This Shank I fynd to be a busye, humerous pot companion.

Mr. Totton, being envited by some of the Hollanders to goe abord to
make merry, took a bark and thought to have donne it; but, being ready
to goe abord, Ushenusque Dono comanded the Japons which carid hym to
retorne back, except he brought a ticket from the Hollanders. Whereupon
they would not be perswaded by any meanes to set them abord. So at his
retorne we thought to have provided hym an English ging to row hym
abord; but the tide was past, that they could not, and so it rested
till the morow mornyng.

Harry Shank is a quarrellsom, drunken fello, and not many dais past
entertayned a wench, although I perswaded hym to the contrary, and
after threw her out at a windoe in an upper loft and put her away in
bad sort. Yet this day he got a dagger in his pocket, and went to her
fathers howse, using hym with bad tearmes to provok hym to com out, and
then wounded hym in 3 places; so that all the street was in an upror.

_June 18._--This mornyng Mr. Totton went abord the Hollanders, rowed in
our owne boate all by Englishmen, to see whether the Hollanders would
forbid hym entrance; and withall I wrot a letter to Ushenusque Dono,
or such _bongew_ as was theare, to geve hym to understand I took the
Hollanders no kinges in Japon that I should seek a passe from them,
willing hym withall to take heed how he medled in matters which tuched
our previleges, as he would answer to the contrary before the Emperour
and the King of Firando, his master, my preveleges alowing me free
passag both by sea and land, to doe my busenes without disturbance of
Japon or any other in Firando or Langasaque.

Mr. Totton was frendly entertayned abord by Capt. Speck and the rest
of Hollanders, and tould hym that it were the Japons that forbad our
coming abord and not he, and that I had good occation to be angry, yf
he should set out any order to forbid thenglish to com abord. And for
my letter which was opened, he made many protestations it was against
his will, he, being busy and the letter brought unto hym, opened it
unawares.

_June 19._--This mornyng fayre wether, wynd northerly but rack
easterly, and sowne after rayne most parte of the day, with much wynd
as abovesaid, and in the night proved a tuffon, or extreme storm of
wynd and rayne, blowing downe or uncovering howses and sincking boates,
and amongst the rest our _foyfone_.

Also in the affter nowne our host Cuemon Dono of Osaky arived heare
at Firando and brought me a present of ij _catabras_, one of silk and
thother lynen, with ij littell packetes fyne rise, and a wyre frame for
a _sequanseky_[241] or cupp. Yt is said the King of Xaxma hath sufferd
the Chinas to land all ther goodes out of the junk the Hollanders
took, not medling with the one partie nor the other. And the Chinas
make a purse amongst them all of 5000 _tais_ to send in a present to
themperour to have redresse against the Hollanders.

This night the tuffon (or storme) drove the 2 Holland shipps agrownd
with the junk they took prize, and, as it is said, are all 3 bildged
and all the merchandiz wett that is in them. Many men speak diversly
of the matter, but most say playnly it is a ponishment of God upon the
Hollanders for wrongfully taking of other mens goodes. Howsoever the
losse will be infynet, all being wet, and now must land that perfnerce
which they thought should never com ashore in Japon.

_June 20._--I sent Mr. Osterwick to Capt. Speck to tell hym I was sory
for the misfortune happened, offring them any help we could. He desired
to have our _foy fone_, which was sunk this night, to helpe them; which
we sowne cleared and made her ready with 14 ores to row and one of our
_jurebassos_, and so sent her to them.

_June 21._--I wrot a letter complementall to Gonroq Dono, that I was
glad of his arivall at Langasaque, as also tuching my processe against
the scrivano of Giquans junk, with other matters, as apereth per
coppie, in the Japon tong. And I wrot an other to Capt. Whow, the China
Capt. at Langasaque, and sent hym all the papers of my processe against
the said scrivano.

And in thaftar nowne Gonrok Donos man came to our English howse, and
tould me he was sent per his master to accompany certen Spaniardes and
Portingales, to signefie to the _Tono_ of Firando that he should not
suffer the Hollanders to let any of their shiping go it (_sic_) to lay
waite for thamakan shipp, as they gave it out they would doe, as also
to comand the Hollandes Capt. in themperours name that he should se it
performed. Yet, as it falls out, they needed not to have taken soe much
paines, for God had prevented their desines and brought their shiping
on grownd, and bildged and broaken her to peeces which should have gon
out. Also the China Capt. tould me that the King of Xaxma had secretly
geven leave to the Chinas that were in the Hollandes junk of priz, put
into that place, that perforce they might discharg their goodes against
the Hollanders wills, which were but few, and then pursue law against
them at themperours Court; which they have donne. And this mornyng the
China Capt. sent one of his servantes to the _bongews_ which saw the
unlading of the goodes out of the China junk, to know wheare the goodes
were put, either into the Hollande howse or the kinges gedong. But he
retorned answer he knew not where they were put. In fine, it is thought
the Hollanders will fall into greate trowble about these busynesses,
and som in this place into danger for permiting matters to passe as
they doe.

The Spaniardes and Portingale come to towne were Alvaro Munos, Lues
Martin, and one Farnandes.

_June 22._--The Hollanders gott one of there shipps called the
_Flushing_ aflote, and hath not much hurte, as they say, besides the
cuting overbord of the mast.

_June 24._--The Hollanders men remeaned ashore, day and night,
notwithstanding the danger their shipping and goodes were falne into
per meanes of this tuffon past. So Albartus, Leonard, and Jacob Swager,
accompanid with Japons, went to ferret them out of their whorehouses.
And som they took, and others escaped into the woodes, after whome they
sent Japons to hunt them out, geveing them five _mas_ or halfe a crowne
str. for each one they brought, which was not long a doing, they being
carid along the streetes with their handes bownd behind them and garded
to the Duch howse lyke theeves; and surly I esteemed them worse, that
would leave their shipps in such danger, som of them never going abord
since the shipps came into harbor.

Our host Cuemon Dono of Osaky came and vizeted me and brought me a
present of a _barso_ of Mywarey wyne.

_June 25._--The Hollanders sought for a caffro which had stolne thinges
from abord, and fownd hym and carid hym abord in bandes. Also there
were souldiers which were unruly ashore and would not keepe quarter
abord, nether cared for mareners, master, nor other, till their
lieutenant soldier came to look them out and carid them abord in bandes.

I envited Cuimon Dono, our host of Osaky, to dyner, _nifon catange_ (or
Japon fation), with an other of Osaky which was in his company, and
their host of Firando; and by chance Alvaro Munos came at same tyme and
dyned with us. This is a suttell Castillano and a tyme observer.

_June 26._--News is com to towne that 3 more of the Hollander men of
war that fought with the Spaniardes at Manillas are without, at an
iland neare unto Langasaque, called Nomozaky. And sowne after the
master of the _Flushing_ came ashore to the English howse, and tould me
that 2 of these shipps which are com in are of Bantam. I say that 2 of
these Holland shipps came from Bantam and the therd from the Manillias;
in which shipp is com Jno. Derickson Lamb, generall of the fleet which
came from the Manillias and fought with the Spaniardes. And now they
say that the ambrall[242] shipp of the Hollanders is lost in that fight
with 2 others, and that 5 Spaniardes were sunck. But it is uncerten
whether it will prove true or no, for that the Hollanders differ soe
much in reportes.

Yt is also said that Capt. Speck gave adviz formerly for these 2 shipps
which are com from Bantam to com of purpose to take the Macon shipp,
and so to carry tymber and other provisions from hence for Molucos, yf
they missed of their purpose.

They report that news was com out of England for Bantam that the
Spanish ambassador was taken or kept prisoner in England for treason
pretended against the Kinges Majestie and state, and that the Kinges
Majestie of England had set out his army royall against the Spaniardes;
which whether it will prove true or no I know not.

Mr. Nealson, being drunk yisternight (as he is seldom sober), fell a
quarreling with Mr. Totton and used hym out of fation; and because I
reproved hym for it, willing hym to goe into his chamber and sleepe,
he fell out with me and cald me ould drunken asse, geveing me many
thretnyng speeches not sufferable, as Mr. Totton, Mr. Osterwick, and
all the rest are witnesse.

_June 27._--Mr. Nealson wrot me he was sory of that which passed
yesternight, promesing amendment; which God grant.

Mr. Totton and Mr. Osterwick went abord the Holland shipps, being
therunto envited per the masters; but Uchenusque Dono, being _bongew_,
sent men to take their ores from them, as they did the lyke from Jno.
Cooke and the chirurgion, with certen peeces stuff was geven them for
presentes; but after, they better bethought them selves and retorned
all. Yt is strang to see how we are misused by these Japons of Firando,
and how that theefe Gorezano is mentayned to misuse us; and the justice
will not compell hym to pay me that he oweth me.

_June 28._--About nowne came news that the Amacan ship is arived at
Langasaque, as also a junck of the China Capten, com from Isla Fermosa,
called by them Taccasanga. Also they bring word that the Hollanders
which com from Bantam say that we have 2 shipps to com for these
partes. God send them well in.

Before night there was letters came to Capt. China from Langasaque,
that it is but a small friggat of adviz which is com from Amacan to
Langasaque, and brought but littell goodes.

The steward of the Duch shipp _Red Lyon_, coming ashore with certen
stuffes to make aparell for the master and others, to the vallue of
50 R. of 8, it was all taken from hym per the Japon _bongews_, and he
wounded in the head because he made resistance. I know not what the
mallapertnes of these Japons should be to forestall men for making
use of their owne, except it be they think to mak booty of all, yf
themperour favor not the Hollanders.

_June 29._--The other 3 Holland shipps enterd into the bay of Cochy
yisternight very late, and the _Flushing_ shot affe 3 peces ordinance
for a welcom, but they answered with non. These 3 which now entred are
the ould _Son_ wherin Jno. Derickson Lamb, the generall, is com from
the Manillas, and the other ij came from Bantam, the on called the
_Black Lyon_, she which was heare the last yeare.

Capt. Speck retorned ashore yisternight, he haveing byn out 4 or 5
daies abord these new com shipps, and, as it is said, was at Langasaque
to speake with Gonrok Dono, whoe, hearing of the arivall of the Amacan
ship, comanded hym in themperours name to retyre to Firando with their
3 new com shipps, according as themperour had ordayned, to thentent the
Macon shipp might enter without empechment. Soe the Hollanders wayed
ancor to com for this place; and sowne after, in sight of them, the
Portingall shipp entred the port of Langasaque.

I forgot to note downe how Mr. Nealson went abord the ij Hollandes
shipps, but was noe sowner abord but the Japon _bongews_ sent to take
away both boate and ores; which he seeing, stepped into the boate
and bad them stand back or enter upon their parell. So they returned
grumbling, thretnyng the Japons which carid us.

About dyner time I was enformed that the junck, which Shobi Dono should
have brought our 5000 skins in the other yeare from Syam, is now arived
at Langasaque, and that she wintered in Champan,[243] and from thence
came this yeare. Soe I presently dispached Mr. Nealson for Langasaque
with 1 bill for 5000 skins, wherof 440 for Andrea Dittis, each to pay
24 skins per cento. fraight; 1 bill of 492 _tais_ Japon plate, to be
paid per Shobio Dono within 30 daies after his arivall at Langasaque.

_June 30._--I went and vizeted the Holland generall named Jno.
Derickson Lamb, and carid hym 2 _barsos_ wyne, a hogg, 20 loves fresh
bread, and 5 hense; and to the capt. of the other ii shipps each
one a _barso_ wyne, a hog, and 20 loves bread. Yt was taken in good
part. I doe perceve by the generall that in the battell they sunk no
Spanish shipp, but that iij Hollanders were sunk, viz. the admerall,
called the _New Son_, and a lesser shipp and a small peenisse, all
the men perishing out of the ij lesser, but saved them which were in
the admerall that were left alive, shee being ready to sinke. But the
viz-admerall, meeting with the other 2 Holland shipps, burnt her selfe,
as I have formerly noted, as also they burned the shipp which went the
last yeare from Xaxma with the treasure which came from New Spaine to
the vallue of 6 millions; but the money was landed before.

I can heare of no letters they brought for us; only they say the small
shipp, which went from hence, was making ready to com back, but can
tell nothing of Capt. Keeling, whether he be gon for England or for the
Molucas. They allso say the English Capt. at Bantam is dead, but know
not his name. Some yet said it was Capt. Jourden, and others said he
was gon for England, and he dead that was left in his place. They also
report that the _Hector_ was cast away at Surat, for falt of looking to
in carynyng.

The ij Duch shipps which came from Bantam did tuch at Pattania, and
say there was but ij Englishmen theare, Mr. Browne and a yowth. Also
yt was tould them that Mr. Benjamyn Farry was dead at Syam. And they
say there was ij French shipps this yeare at Bantam, but came without
money and so could doe nothing. Their pilottes were Hollanders, which
the Hollanders at Bantam took out of them per force, us they did the
like per all other Hollanders they found in them. They say there is iij
other French shipps coming after to second them, which, yf they speed
no better then these, will not geve the adventurers curadge to send any
more.

These Hollanders report very strang newes out of England of treason
pretended against the Kinges person, wherin the quandum Countes of
Essex, that was marid to the Earle of Somercet, should have a hand, as
also be a contriver of the death of Prince Henry. In fine they tell
strange matters.

There were 4 or 5 English men abord the _Son_, the admerall shipp of
the Hollanders, which, as it seemed, were afraid to make them selves
knowne unto me; and one of them, a talle fello, stood staring as yf
he had byn agast, and tould me he was dowbtfull whether he might tell
me he was an English man or no. It hath made me to enter into many
imagenations of the speeches of killing our English men at Pulaway and
taking it from our English nation, whome had pocession of it before
for the Kinges Ma^{tie} of England. Also of the poisonyng of Capt.
Castelton, which they put upon the Spaniardes; yet may and is dowbted
over much by the familliarety betwix hym and Jno. Derickson Lamb, the
Hollandes generall.[244]

_July 1._--Skydayon Dono, capt. of our junck _Sea Adventure_, wrot a
letter to his brother, which letter came per junck of Shoby Dono from
Champan, wherin he advized hym how our junk _Sea Adventure_ made her
voyage from hence to Syam in 28 dayes. God send her safely to retorne.

_July 2._--Gonrok Dono sent his man to Capt. Speck with a present of 2
peare _beawbs_.[245] The _beawbs_ were sent to Jno. Derickson Lamb.

I understood Jno. Derickson Lamb would bring in his shipp this day,
wherupon I sent our _foyfony_ with 14 ores to helpe to toe her in; but
she came not in, but the lesser shipp called the _Gallyasse_. I sent
Richard Kyng in the _foyfony_, because he spoke Duch; and it fortuned
the Englishmen fownd opertunety to tell hym they asked the generall
leave to com ashore, to vizet their cuntreymen. But he reprooved them,
saying they held the English in these partes for their mortall enemies,
and therefore forbad them to com to our howse. This unfrendly dealing
doth still conferme me in my former opinion that they have slayne our
men in the Molucas. God grant they have not used som trechery against
Generall Keeling. And at this instant came a drunken Flemyng to our
English howse, whoe tould me they were forbidden upon payne of their
lives to com to the English howse, "yet", said he, "I will com to yow,
and were I out of the Hollanders service I would never serve them more".

_July 3._--I went and viseted Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, and
carid hym 2 _barsos_ wyne and 2 cordes drid fyshes, exskewsing my not
coming before since his brothers departure. He asked me whie we did
not take China junkes, as well as the Hollanders. I answerd hym we
could not take any that were frendes to the King of England, as the
Chinas weare and all others till wars were procleamed. He also asked me
whether we would take Spaniardes or Portingall shipps, yf we met them.
I answerd hym that we had more reason to doe that then to take Chinas,
for that they did take ours, yf they had strength to doe it. "But,"
said he, "I think the Emperour will not permit the one nor the other
to meddell with the shipp of Amacon." I tould hym I thought to the
contrary, that the Emperour would rather permit us to take Spaniardes
then Chinas, for, yf we took them, we would bring them in heare. "But,"
said he, "yf yow had taken her this yeare, yow might well have brought
her in. But how should we doe hereafter, yf yow debar us from that
continuall trade?" I answerd we should not want to bring in yearly the
lyke comodetie either from one place or other.

He tould me that he had noted a long tyme that the Hollanders and we
were frendes but from tooth outward and not cordially, as neighbours
and frendes ought to be. I answerd hym the falt was not ours but the
pride of the other, which would make the world to beleeve they were
that which they were not. For that it was well knowne there was no
comparison to be made betwixt their small state, governed by a county,
with the mighty and powrefull government of the King of England, whoe
did in som sort governe them, keeping garrisons in their cheefest
places.

I also tould hym I marveled that the Firando _bongews_ the other day
did take the ores out of the boates which carid us abord the Holland
shipps, with such peeces of stuffes as were geven our folkes to make
them aparell. He answerd me he knew nothing thereof, only order was
geven by Taccamon Dono to restreigne all men from buying till order
came from themperour what was to be donne therein. I asked hym then by
what authorety Gorezano was suffered to buy and to goe up and downe
in the shipps with greate bagges of money, to buy and doe what hee
list; which speech put hym to a non plus that he knew not what to say.
In fine, I tould hym that I had a processe against this Goresano for
money he owed me, and had required justice long ago, and put my papers
into Taccamon Donos handes, but could have no end thereof, only now I
desird hym that seeing this fello had money to build howses and buy
merchandiz, that he might be constrayned to pay me that which he oweth.
He answerd me he would speake to Taccamon Dono to doe me justice.

There came 2 Japons to the English howse, which came in these Duch
shipps, and complaine that the Hollanders will not pay them their wagis
according to promis, and desired, when our shiping came, yf we had need
of men, that they might be entertayned, for that they would not serve
the Hollanders any more, haveing byn soe badly dealt with for their 6
yeares servis now past.

_July 4._--The admerall ship of the Hollanders, called the _Sone_,
came into Firando road this day, and shot afe 7 peces ordinance, and 4
we[re] shot out of the _Gallias_ and certen chambers from Duch howse.
I sent Mr. Osterwick abord to bid the generall, Jno. Derickson Lamb,
welcom, and sent hym by hym 2 peare silk stockinges for a present, viz.
one crimson, and thother sad blew, which he took in good parte, telling
Mr. Osterwick he would com and vizet me at our English howse.

Towardes night Mr. Nealson arived from Langasaque, and brought the 3800
skins along with hym, as also a letter from Mr. Wm. Eaton, dated in
Syam, le 28th February, 1616, but kept till 13th March, and sent per
way Champa.

1 from Mr. Benjamyn Farry in Judea,[246] at Syam, 1th June, 1616.

1 from Mr. Jno. Johnson and Mr. Ric (?) Pitt in Judea, 13th Marche,
1616.

1 from Mr. James Burges, pilot of _Sea Adventure_, 16 Marche, 1616.

1 from Jno. Ferrers, at Paria in Champa, 18 May, 1617.

1 from Robt. Burges, ditto Champa, without date.

All which letters came in the junk Shoby Dono from Champa, som of them
being sent in a small _soma_ from Syam to Champa, with a cargezon
goodes amonting to 680 _tais_, under charg of Piter Hall, Jno. Ferrers,
and Robt. Burges for pilot. God send us good news of them hereafter,
for they advize a Portugall frigat took the Hollandes bark going out
to retorne for Syam. They advize both from Syam and Champa, as also
from Camboja, that the kinges of those places, as also of Cochinchina,
desire much to have our shipping to trade into their cuntres,
espetially he of Cochinchina, but to com in our owne shiping, and not
in Japons, for that he hath banished them out of his cuntrey, I meane
the renegages enhabeting in those partes, which did all the mischeefe
before.

I receved a letter from Jor. Durois, of 12th July, in Langasaque,
wherin he adviseth of 20 Spanish gallions arived this yeare in the
Indies at Malacca, viz. 12 Spanish and 8 Portugeze, with order to roote
out all Hollanders at Bantam, Molucos, and else wheare, and not to let
one remeane alive. God grant it prove falce and confownd them in their
proceadinges. This news he sayeth cometh from the Manillas, and that
the Spaniardes chased away the Hollanders from thence with losse of 3
Hollande shipps and no Spaniardes; which is a lye, and so I hope the
rest may prove.

_July 5._--I sent Mr. Osterwick to tell Capt. Speck the newes we heard
of the takeing a bark or boate of theirs on the bar of Champa by a
Portingale friggat, as also what Jor. Durois had wrot me of the 20
gallions arived at Malacca. But he skarce did vouchsafe to open his
lipps unto hym or look at hym, but sent to know what he had to say.
At the same tyme Jno. Derckson Lamb was by, and som 50 or 60 small
shot plying their muskets before hym, he walking in state with a
greate cheane of gould 4 fould about his neck, and had sentenelles of
musketers standing in each quarter of the howse, with musket in rest
and mach in cock; but whether they did it to shew greatnesse, or for
feare to be supprised (their consciences accusing them), I know not.

_July 6._--The Duch domine came to the English howse, and, as I
perceaved by his speech, he was aware of w[rong] amo[ng]st them,
saying they had not the feare of God before their eyes, and therefore
could not be happey in their proceadinges. And sowne after came the
fiscall, unto whome I showed my adviz (or letter) I had receaved of
the 20 seale Spanish gallions arived at Malacca. He said it should be
strange yf such a strength should com at once out of Spaine, without
being seconded per the Hollanders, who no dowbt would not want to have
a care thereof; and did verely think that their Company and the English
weare all joyned in one before now, for that the difference, being but
a money matter, could not chuse but sowne be decyded. Yt should seeme
their is but littell good will between this fiskall and Capt. Speck.

Yt is strang to see the unrulynes of these Hollande mareners and
souldiers, how they goe stagring drunk up and downe the streetes,
slashing and cutting ofe each other with their knyves, lyke mad men.

_July 7._--This day Mr. Totton had much conference with an English man
which came in the Hollande shipps, and did what he could to learne
out whether the Hollanders had kild our English men at Pulaway in the
Molucos. This fello was loath to say any thing, yet in the end he
confessed that he had heard others report that we had 5 or 7 English
men in that iland, and had taken a howse a littell up within the
cuntrey, and planted the English flag on the hiest parte thereof; which
coming to knowledg of Jno. Dirickson Lamb, the Hollande generall, he
sent for them to come downe to hym, which the English men denied to
doe, retornyng hym word they had taken pocession of that place for
the King of England, and that they would keepe it and mentayne it to
the last drop of blood they had in their bodies; which the Hollander
perceaving sent a multitude of Molucan people to take them perforce and
to bring them to hym alive or dead; which was performed and 2 English
men seene brought downe, bownd hand and foote, by that raskall rable;
but what became of the rest this man knew not. Thus much have I noted
downe, that, whether I live or dye, yet I hope this my hand writing may
com to the handes of our honorable employers, and that our gratious
soveraigne, King James, will not let his subjectes be murthered and his
pocessions taken from hym in such sort.

And we sould the rest of our ellophantes teeth to Shroyemon Dono at 70
_tais picull_, waying 619 _cattis_; and were waid out unto hym this day.

I forgot to note downe how thenglishman tould us that when the mutenous
Hollanders and their consortes had kild our Englishmen at Poolaway and
brought downe our English flag, the drunken, envious Hollanders (brave
men) puld it in peeces and dru it thorow ... and made cleane ... with
it.

_July 8._--I thought good to note downe heare how Taccamon Dono sent to
know what our ellophantes teeth waid and the price we sould them for,
and to see the money we rec. for them. And I retorned hym word I would
not let hym know nether the one nor other. I know not what this should
meane, except they thinke to have som advantage against the Hollanders,
and imagin to make their case and ours all one. Yet my comfort is, they
shall never prove we have theeve stolne goodes, and therefore not to
geve accompt to them of what we have.

Also the servant of Tonomon Samme came and shewed me a letter which he
had rec. from Gonrok, that yf any poulder or lead came in Hollanders or
English shipping, to keepe it for themperour. I tould hym he might have
put the English before the Hollander, for it was his place, and for
the rest, what we had was at themperoures service, as reason would it
should be.

_July 9._--Capt. Speck, accompanid with Jno. Yoosen and Albartus, came
to our English howse, and amongst other matters asked me what new and
how those people used us. I answerd hym it was no news to tell hym how
we are misused, and that I fownd it every day worse then other. He
tould me it was imposseble any others were soe misused as they, for
that the Japons kept watch and ward about their howse and about their
shipps, and would not let the neighbours enter into their howse, nor
suffer the cuntry people to sell them provision of victuelles nor lett
them have a boate and people to cary Jno. Yoosen to Langasaque.

_July 10._--I forgot to note downe that yesterday, in the after
nowne, the servant of Gonrok Dodo came to the howse of Tome Dono, our
next neighbour, a Japon papist, and called secretly to hym both our
_jurebassos_, with Domingo, my boy, and there made them all drunk, I
know not to what end, except it were to learne of them what speeches
passed in our howse.

News was brought the China Capt. of a junk from Syam arived at
Langasaque, which came in company of 5 which came from thence, but lost
company after they passed Isla Fermosa (or Tacca Sanga). God send them
well.

The Holland generall, Jno. Derekson Lamb, sent me a present of a
_barica_ Spanish wyne, 3 Holland cheeses, ij baskettes suger candy, and
6 gammons China bacon; and sent it by an English souldier, a gentelmans
sonne in the west cuntrey.

Ushenusque Dono came to vizet me with many fayre wordes, unto whome
I did in som sort tell how we were worse used then in tyme of Foyne
Samme. He said I had reason soe to say, yet we must consider the
government was otherwais now in Japon then it was in the tyme of Ogosho
Samme, for that the _tonos_ in Japon would not be comanded in such sort
by Shongo Samme as they were by Ogosho [Samme]. These speeches of his
were strange.

_July 11._--Soyemon Dono came this day to vizet me, and amongst
other speeches I tould hym it was strange to see how both we and the
Hollanders were used now in respect of tyme past. He said that, for
us, he knew not any thing whereby we should be misused; but for the
Hollanders, they had brought much stolne goodes, and the _tono_ of this
place had great reazon to look unto their proceadinges till order came
from the Emperour for the disposing thereof. Yet, at first entring
of the ij Holland shipps and junk, the kynges brother offerd to take
the matter in hand and to councell them for the best, and to certefy
the Emperour yt was Portingalles goodes. At which his offer Capt.
Speck lawghed, seting light by his speeches, geving hym bad tearmes.
Whereupon he hath ever since held this strickt course for his owne
discharg, and advised the Emperour that all which came in their shipps
and junk is Chinas goodes, taken from them per force, which he thinkes
the Emperour will not suffer any stranger take; and brought in for a
presedent how, in Ticus Samas tyme, when the Japons had wars against
Corea and China, that certen Japons went on the China cost, robing
and spoiling without themperours comision, geting greate ruches, but
at their retorne were all put to death and the goodes confiscat into
the Emperours handes, parte being retorned to Chinas which [could lay]
claime unto it.

_July 12._--Yisternight late I receaved a letter from Jor. Durois, per
Fachemon, dated in Langasaque, 16th July, new stile, wherin he advised
me of the entry of a friggat at Langasaque, which came from Goa and
tuched at Amaccu; but writ of no newse. Also that 3 barkes of Twans
are retorned, which were sent out to have taken Taccasango (or Isla
Fermosa), but could effect nothing, yet were put into Cochinchina,
where they saw Capt. Adames junk and others labouring to get straight,
but thought would not retorne full laden. This he writes.

Jno. Derickson Lamb, the Hollande generall, came to our English
howse, and Capt. Speck with the rest of the principall Hollanders did
accompany hym. I gave hym the best entertaynment I could, and, as it
seemed, to his and the restes content.

And I forgot to note downe that ij or 3 daies past divers Hollanders
did sue unto me to get other prisoners pardon, thinking I might doe
as much for them as I had donne for others before. Soe this day,
amongst other conferrence, I gave hym thanks for the honor he did me
in releasing or pardoning those offenders at my being abord, I being
ashamed to make sute for any others, although som had entreated me
thereunto; yet I desyred Capt. Speck and the rest of the company to
speake to the generall in their behalves. In fine, they said nether
yea nor no; yet rather made shew to encline to my request. I gave an
item to Capt. Speck, and he cald to generall to heare it, that I was
enformed to (_sic_) Spaniards went about to soborne their men to run
away, and that, yf they took not good heed, they [would] want men to
cary away their shipps, and th[at it is] in my opinion not good to
use over much p[unishment] for light offences comited per meanes of
drunke[nness]. Yt seems they took my adviz in good parte.

Soyemon Dono forestald the bay with netts, and made a fyshing just over
against our English howse, and sent me a dish of fysh; and I retornd
thanks, with a bottell Spanish wyne and a littell conserves. Soe,
presently after, he sent to envite me and the rest English to supper,
where, amongst other speeches, I asked them what they thought of this
busynes of the Hollanders; and they are of opinion it will not be ended
in 1 yeare nor yet in 2, and that the Emperour will hould pocession.
This they reported, and the rather because answer of the letter sent to
themperour about that matter were retornd this day, but noe order that
the Hollanders should enjoy that which they have taken.

_July 13._--The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned from Langasaque
yisternight in all hast, to send up new replies to the Cort to enforme
against Hollanders. The _Tono_ of Firando sent me a letter from Miaco
with ij _catabras_ for a present. His desire was to have had all our
ellophants teeth, and that he sent money to pay for them; but all the
teeth were sould to Shroyemon Dono before.

There is a China com from Camboia whoe tells me that it is true the
Portingale frigot hath taken a boate (or _somo_), laden with goods for
the Englishmen and bound for Pattania wherin were iij Englishmen, whome
they put all to death; and that there was good store ready money in our
said _soma_. Which news coming to the eares of the Kyng of Camboia, he
forthwith banished all the Portingales out of his cuntrey, and sent out
7 or 8 carecoles (or boates) well armed to have taken the Portingale
frigat, but could not meete with them. But serten Japon fugeties,
which are thought to be of them which were formerly banished out of
Cochinchina, did joyne with the said Portingales; whereupon the Kyng of
Camboia hath lykwaies banished all Japons out of his cuntrey. Thus much
this China reporteth to be true. He sayeth ferther that ij Portingale
fryres, of them which were lately banished out of Japon, had lykewaies
setled them selves in Camboia, but are banished amongst the rest.

The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, gave me a China seame (or draught
nett), and I gave hym 2 lynen _catabras_.

Many Holland mareners came to thenglish howse, complayning how they
were misused and beaten lyke boyes without forme or reason. Yt is
dowbtfull many will run away in the end.

_July 14._--I rec. a letter from Magazemon Dono, our host of Miaco,
with a box and 20 ordenary fans, for a present, in it. Also an other
from the _maky_ dono, with 3 boxes or chistes _maky_ ware, which were
opened, viz.:--

In one chist, 20 tankards.

In an other, 20 large spoote pottes.

In an other, 20 lesser spoote pottes.

_July 15._--Alvaro Munos came this mornynge and tould me that the
Portingals had taken no English men but Hollanders on the cost of
Camboia, and, as I am enformed, went to the Hollanders and tould them
it were English which were taken.

Also Gonrok Dono sent the scrivano I have the plito withall to this
place, he haveng tould hym that I had receved all the dead Chinas
goodes from hym, soe that the matter might be brought in question
before the justis of this place. So now I hope this lying theefe shall
have his disertes, for I have not receved any such matters.

_July 16._--The Hollande fiscall came to vizet me, exskewsing hym selfe
he came not in company of the generall, his busynes being such as he
could not, with many other complementall words. He tould me of the
extreme justis they had showed to the trumpeter and an other in beating
them allmost dead. I answerd hym that it were not good, in my opinion,
to use over much rigor in punishing drunken men; for it was not they,
but the wyne which was occation therof; yet I denid not but such justis
was fit to be used aganst hainose offenders. In fine, we had some
speeches tuching their busynes against the Chinas; and he said that, yf
themperour did not lett them quietly pocesse that which they had taken,
they would take Japons as well as others the next yeare.

_July 17._--I sent Mr. Osterwick, with a _jurebasso_, to Tonomon Samme
about my processe against the scrivano of Giquans junk; and he said he
would take councell about it and doe me justice, and that, yf he had
knowne of the matter before, he would have ended it. But these are but
wordes, for I had long before enformed hym of it, and he turned me over
to Taccamon Dono, who, as I have formerly noted, would nether doe me
justice in that matter, nor in any other which from tyme to tyme I have
brought before hym.

An ould Frenchman of 70 yeares ould, of Marselles, came to thenglish
howse this day and tould me he had served the Spaniardes in the
Manilles 11 yeares, and the last yeare went with Don Jno. de Silva
to Malacca, and from thence was sent in company of 1 galley and 3
friggates to sucker the Spaniardes at Molucas, and there (upon som
occation of discontent) fled to the Hollanders, and came in their
fleet this yeare to the Manillias, showing them all the portes and
places where shipping might enter, doing them better servis for that
place then any other which was in their fleet could doe. And was in
the Holland admerall shipp when she was soonk, where he lost all that
ever he had but the cloathes on his back. And now, being arived in this
place, he being an ould man, desired the generall he might lye ashore
in any howse he would apoint hym; but, in lieu of his demand, he clapt
iron shackles on his legges, not geveing hym a peny to buy hym foode
nor rayment, which drove the ould man into such desperation that he
ment to hang hym selfe. In fine, he did curse the Hollanders extremely,
and said they had misused our English nation very much in the Molucas,
which he hoped would com to the King of Englands knowledg, that he
might take revenge on them. He had his boltes or shackles on his legges
when he spake to me, and still, when he looked on them, wept lyke a
childe.

_July 18._--Soyemon Dono sent for one of our _jurebassos_, and bid hym
tell me that Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, Taccamon Dono, cheefe
justis, and hym selfe ment to goe a fyshing within a day or two, and
desired my company.

_July 19._--Tonomon Samme, kinges brother, sent for me to make an end
of my processe with the scrivano of junk. And I fownd Bongo Samme,
Taccamon Dono, and Soyemon Dono, Shosque Dono, and others in company
with hym, but the scrivano was not there (at least he was not in
sight). I tould them I needed not to speake any more about this matter,
for that Taccamon Dono knew it as well as my selfe. In fine, they
referd me till to morrow to take _danco_ (or councell).

And I thought good to note downe how, in the meane tyme I was theare,
Capt. Speck sent his _jurebasso_ to demand lycence to sell 2000 deare
skins, which I make accompt came in their shipps which tuched at
Pattania, or else they are purchase. They retornd hym answer they would
take councell about it, althoughe he aledged the losse of them this hot
wether, yf present sale were not made. In fine, I had nothing saide for
selling ours (to the China Capt.) which came in Shoby Donos junk.

_July 20._--Soyemon Dono came and tould me how I was to make my writing
against the theevish scrivano, and dowbted not but I should get my
processe; but desird me to keepe it secret, for that he would not be
knowne to favor my cause, he being to judg of the matter betwixt us.

There was reportes geven out of 2 junkes which are arived in a port
of Shaxma, which came from Syam, one of them thought to be the _Sea
Adventure_.

_July 21._--The kinges brother, Tonomon Samme, sent for me to make
an end of my processe with the scrivano of Giquan, whome I fownd
accompanid with the boateswane of the junk and the China, Giquans
kynsman, with an other fello who cleamed 120 _picos_ sappon of our
wood, but had no papers to shew, but tould a longe Canterbury tale. But
this Jno. a Nokes was sowne sent away. The China desird restetution of
the junk, and that the scrivano should deliver the dead mans goodes
unto hym. But I shewed bills that I had right both to the one and
other, and desired the scrivano might deliver those goodes to me, as
also 42 _picos_ sappon yet wanting of the cupplement. So we weare all
dismissed and attend the conclution. I forgot to note down that the
China brought a _jurebasso_ with hym who spoke the Japon tonge, and I
shewing them ij bills I had in the China tong, this fello spake to the
_jurebasso_ to say they were not made as they ought to be, and that it
might passe because none of us knew the China tong; but the _jurebasso_
reproved hym. I think the reason was because he was much in feare to
fall into danger per any occation.

_July 22._--I rec. 2 letters from Jor. Durois, dated in Langasaque, le
22th and 25th July, new stile. He writes still that it is true that
20 gallions are at Malacca, and are gon for Bantam, as also that the
Spaniardes have taken the ij Holland shipps, which yet want, at the
battle of Manillia, which, if it be soe, are called the _New_ and _Ould
Moon_. He saieth also they took a galle; but that is a lie, for the
Hollanders had non (as they say).

_July 23._--I sent our _jurebasso_ to the kinges brother to know what
end he will make of my processe against the scrivano. He retorned
answer how he had this day envited the Hollanders to dyner, but
tomorrow would geve me to understand of all. And sowne after he sent to
borrow our chears, cushins, spoons, silver forkes, cups, tableclothes,
and napkins, with one of our Japon servantes, to show them how to order
the meate after the Christen fation, and withall sent for a bottell
Spanish wyne and som salet oyle; all which was sent hym.

And I thought good to note downe how Mr. Nealson and Mr. Totton went
abord the Holland shipp which is sunk, being envited per the master and
pilot; but the Japon _bongew_ took one of our rowers out of the boate,
beating hym and sending hym per land to Taccamon Dono, who sowne after
set hym at liberty and sent hym to me.

There came newes to towne of a boates casting away coming from
Langasaque, wherin were iij Chinas and 6 Japons. God grant there were
no money in it sent from Capt. Whaw, the China Capt., for me. We wrot
hym to send som.

Our _jurebasso_ brought back the plate and lynen lent the kyng, and
tould us of the greate feaste was made to the Hollanders, and the
lustie drinking, and that, amongst other talkes, Capt. Speck asked what
our _jurebasso_ made theare, and was answered for his skill in cookery.
At their departure (I meane the Hollanders) from the kinges howse,
there was 15 peeces ordinance shot affe.

We delivered divers sortes merchandiz to Jno. Japon to sell in the
shopp or shew roome over the way.

_July 24._--The Duch preacher of thadmerall ship came to vizet me. He
was borne at Hornchurch, in Essex, and his mother an English woman. I
gave hym a new peare black silk stockinges. Yt seemeth he is awery of
being amongst these Hollanders, whom he sayeth have littell respect to
religion, and therefore doth not marvill that God hath chastissed them
in their proceadinges at Manillias.

I receved 5 letters from Edo, viz. 1 from Mrs. Adames, 1 from her sonne
Joseph, 1 from her sister Magdalena, 1 from Andrea, Mag. husband, 1
from Tome, the _jurebasso_ of Massamoneda. Mrs. Adames writes that
Neamon Dono is coming downe to bring money for all our goodes sould.

_July 25._--I wrot a letter to Gonrok Dono about my processe with
scrivano, and sent Mr. Totton with it, accompanid with Harry Shank and
Co. John for _jurebasso_.

Also I wrot another letter to Jorge Durois in answer of his two, and
sent hym 30 _tais_ per Mr. Totton, paid out per Mr. Jno. Osterwick,
viz.:--

                                                        _ta. ma. co._
  Pro 2 _cattis_ almandes for Mr. Totton, cost           01   0   0
  Pro 1 peare cotton yorne stockinges for myselfe,
  cost                                                   01   0   0
  Pro 20 pigions to put into dufhowse, cost              02   0   0
  Pro tallo candelles for howse expence, cost            01   5   0
  Pro 1 peare russet silk stocking for Mr. Totton        02   5   0
  Pro 2 peare cotton yorne stocking for Mr. Totton       01   2   0
  Pro 1 pec. black satin for my selfe                    10   0   0
  Pro 33 sarsages (or langusas) for howse expence        00   8   0
  Pro 12 drid neates tonges for howse expence            00   5   0
  Pro a jar green ginger, containing 55 _cattis_, for
  howse expence                                          06   5   0
  Pro 1 peare russet silk stocking for my selfe, cost    03   0   0
  Pro 1 peare cotton yorne stockinges for my selfe       00   7   0

        Som totall amontes unto                          30   7   0


Mr. Totton carid Henry Shank and Co. John with hym for _jurebassos_,
and Andrea Dittis wrot a letter to his brother to helpe Mr. Totton in
our affares.

I rec. a letter from Capt. Whow, China Capt. at Langasaque, with 10
pots sett with trees and slowers [flowers?], and 4 gilden fyshes, for a
present.

I forgot to note downe how Soyemon Dono made a fishing over against
English howse with cormorants made fast to long cordes behind their
winges, and bridles from thence before their neckes to keepe the fish
from entring their bodies, so that when they took it they could take yt
out of their throtes againe.

This day one George Dowry,[247] an English gentleman which serveth
in the Holland shipp (whose father, as I understand, is a Devonshire
man and a justice of peace and dwelleth at Dowry house), he tould me
that there is much hould and keepe amongst the Holland councell heare.
Som would have the comander to goe up, and others no, espetialy Capt.
Speck is wholy against it. Soe it is thought the fiscall shall procead
in that voyage. Also he sayeth the comander, Jno. Dirickson Lamb, is
much blamed for his proceadinges at Manillas, his comition being to
keepe his fleete togeather to defeate that of Don Juan de Silva; but he
unadvisedly seperated them, and so was set upon at an unadvantadg, by
which meanes he was overthrowne.

He also tould me they took a small junck, wherin they fownd all
Don Jno. de Silvas designes, emprinted in the Spanish tong in the
Manillias, which was to have joyned his forces of the Manillias,
which were 10 gallions, to those which he thought to have fownd at
Malacca com from Goa and other places, which, with gallies and other
vessells of war, might be as many more, I meane 20 seale in all. With
which forces he first thought to have gon directly for the Ilands of
Murises[248], there to have met with such Holland shipps as were bound
homwards, and after the spoile of them to have retorned by the cost
of Sumatra, and so for Bantam, to have destroid all, both English and
Duch, not letting any one remeane alive, generall nor other. But, as
I noted heretofore, his forces he ment to have met at Malacca were
destroid and 4 gallions Portugezes burned, one per the King of Achin
and the other 3 per the Hollanders. So, Don Jno. dying at Malacca,
his fleet was dispersed, one gallion being cast away in a storme at
Malacca, and other 2 sent for New Spayne. So 7 retorned for Manillas,
where they wintered and were brought agrownd, most of them being halfe
full of water and all unrigged when the Hollanders first came on the
cost, which they saw with their eyes; yet the gridines of pilling China
junks made them to abstayne from that they ought to have donne till it
was to late to be amended.

_July 26._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Whow, to thank hym for the present
he sent me; and I gave his men which brought it in a boate, they being
xij men, a bagg of rise, a barill of wyne, and one _tay_ in small
plate. Capt Whow sent an other present to Capt. Speck with an other
letter; but he did not vouchsafe to thank hym for it, nor to write a
letter in answer of his, nor gave any thing to them which brought the
present.

Capt. Shoby Dono came to Firando and brought me a present of halfe a
lb. of lignum allowas (or _calemback_[249]), with 2 Champa matts. And
an other which came in company with hym brought me a box of cumfets.

Leonard the Hollander came to thenglish howse and tould me the _tonos_
brother (Tonomon Samme) asketh a therd of all they have taken, in right
of his brother; but I think they will not [geve] it. I had rather have
that then ten kyngdoms of Firando.

_July 27._--The Hollanders envited Lues Martin and Alvaro Munes abord
the _Black Lion_ whoe is admerall, where their weare many guns shot
affe for healths, but of whome I know not, for I cannot esteem it was
for the King of Spaine, whoe is their mortall enemye; and at their
retorne ashore had 3 calverins shot afe for a farewell. Many Japons and
Chinas took notis thereof and could not chuse but laugh.

We made an accompt at hazard or by estimation with Tozayemon Dono, host
of Sackay, as apeareth by perticulars noted downe in the wast book,
viz.:--

  Bordes of 2 _tatt._, 300 at 9 _condrins_ per bord.
  Bordes of 3 _tat._, 800 at 1 _mas_ 2½ _condr._ per bord.
  Plankes of 4 _tat._, 25 at 6½ _mas_ per plank.
  Iron ordenary, 50 _pico._, at 16 _mas picull_.
  Ditto yet to come, 50 _pico._, at 15 _mas pic._
  Copper in _gocos_, 100 _pic._ to com, at 6_ta._ 5_ma._ 6_co._ per
  _pico_.
  Copper in bars, 100 _pic._ to com, at 8_ta._ 5_ma._ 0_co._ per _pico_.
  Charges bordes and copper and iron laden abord barkes, 18_ta._ 7_ma._
  0_co._

_July 28._--This day was held festivall by the nobles of Firando in
remembrance of Dono Samme, father of Foyne Samme, soe that (as their
order is) they drunk hard, pristes and all. And in the end Tonomon
Samme, the kinges brother, going home, met a Hollander in the streete,
it may be in as good a pickell as hym selfe, and, because he used no
reverence to hym, caused his men to beate hym, breaking his head and
cuting affe 2 or 3 of his fingers. But he was nothing comended of any
man for it.

_July 29._--Mr. Totton retorned from Langasaque, and brought word that
Gonrok Dono said our bills in China languadg and Japons were made soe
short that he could not judg on our side, but rather on the contrary.
Soe it seemeth he harkned on both the China and the Japon scrivano,
Cayanseque, to proceead against me, the one for 140 _pico_ wood, and
the other for all the dead China capt. Giquans goods. So now they are
retorned all to Firando.

It is said Belange Lewes junk is com from the Manillas within 9 or 10
leages of Langasaque, but not yet entred, and 2 or 3 other junks upon
the cost.

_July 30._--We were envited to supper to Taccamon Dono as the China
Capt. was the like, where we had good cheare, _nifon catange_ (or Japon
fation), and at departure he gave me a _wacadash_ (or small Japon
_cattan_) and a _catabra_ to China Capt.

I receaved a letter from Mr. George Savidge, per a China, dated in
Camboja, le 10th May last past, wherin he writes me how the Portingales
did soe insence the king against our nation at his first arivall that
once he gave order that he should avoid out of his dominions, but
after, upon better enformetion of their false reportes, caused hym to
stay. And since that tyme, fynding the Portingales gilty of treason
against the king and his sonne, he hath banished them all out of his
dominions, and the rather for that they took a Holland bark going out
and carid men and goods to Amacau.

Tonomon Samme sent ij men unto me to know whether I would deliver 140
_pico_ wood to the scrivano and 30 to the China _tico_. I sent Mr.
Osterwick back with them, with a _jurebasso_, to tell hym I had no wood
for the one nor other, but to the contrary was to rec. 42 _pico_ I yet
wanted, and desird that handes might be laid on the said scrivano that
he made not an escape till he had delivered the said sappon and Chinas
goodes, etc.

Jno. Osterwick, going abroad with the Hollanders and being drunken,
misused me in termes at his pleasure. I find hym a prowd, surly yong
man, and one that scorns all men in respect of hym selfe.

_July 31._--Much rayne per night with extreme lightnyng and thunder, as
I have not heard the lyke since we arived in Japon.

I sent our _jurebasso_ to thank Taccamon Dono for our good cheare, and
to goe to Tonomon Samme to desire hym to keepe fast Cayanseque, the
scrivano, till he delivered me the 42 _pico_ sappon and the Chinas
goodes which is dead. But he could not com to speech of Tonomon Samme,
but left word with his man.

We had news that the capt. moore of the Portingall shipp at Langasaque
comanded Lues Martin to accompany hym to Miaco (or Edo), to speake to
themperour and mak complaint against the Hollanders for robing at seas.
But Lues Martin denid hym and came secretly to Firando, for which the
Porting. capt. thretneth to hang hym.

I rec. a letter from Alvaro Munos, from Langasaque, dated le 8th
August, new stile, wherin he wrot me how Billang Luis is arived from
the Manillas, reporting the overthrow the Spaniardes had geven to the
Hollanders in that place, burnyng and sinking 3 of their ships and
driveing other 2 on grownd, with the losse of 66 Spaniardes, and had
taken 80 Hollanders prisoners, etc.

_August 1._--I rec. 3 letters this day, in Japons, viz.:--

1 from Edo, from the King of Crates; 1 from Miaco, from Safian Dono; 1
from Miaco, from Jubio Dono--all three letters complementall in answer
of myne.

And in the after nowne I rec. a letter from Mr. Wickham, how he was
arived within 3 or 4 leagues of Firando; and therupon I sent out the
_foyfone_ with Mr. Totton to meet them, whoe brought them into the
roade of Cochy late at night. And Mr. Wickham came ashore within night,
and tould me how the Hollanders had taken the ----[250] and _Swan_, tow
of the Hon^{ble} Companies ships that were in the Molucas, kyling 5 men
in doing therof, and keepe the rest prisoners, etc.

_August 2._--The _Adviz_ entred into harbour of Firando, and Taccamon
Dono came abord her before shee entred, sending 12 or 14 boates to tow
her in, as the Hollanders sent their _foyfone_ with 20 ores to helpe
to doe the lyke. Taccamon Dono had 5 peeces ordinance shot affe at his
departure, and other 5 we shot affe as we passed by the Duch howse,
they haveing first shot 5 pece out of admerall, and after, other 5
from howse; and when we came to an ancor we shot affe 7 more, and the
Holland admerall answerd with 5. So, going ashore, we had 7 more shot
affe.

The _tono_ sent ij men to stay abord (as he said) till our goods were
delivered ashore, to see we had no injury offered us. I answerd them it
was needles, yet in thend was content they should stay this night, till
I had better enformed the king of the matter.

The Japons stole Mr. Tottons Terky coate (or gowne) from abord [it
haveng a gould ring with a diamond in the pocket],[251] no ring in it.

And I rec. of Mr. Wickham these letters following, viz.:

  1 generall letter from Wor. Compa., dated in London, 30th July 1615,
  with 1 copy sent per _Clove_ to us in generall, and 1 copy per _Clove_
  to Capt. Adames.
  1 from Sir Thomas Smith, dated 31th January, 1615.
  1 from my brother, Walter Cocks, in London, 8th January, 1614.
  3 from my nephew, Jno. Cocks, at Cape Bona Spe., 26th June, 1616.
  2 from Capt Georg Bale, from Bantam, 9th June, 1617.
  1 from Capt. Copendall, from Bantam, 9th ditto ano.
  1 from Mr. Westby, from Bantam, 5th ditto ano.
  1 from Harnando Shimenes, Bantam, 4th ditto ano.
  1 letter retornd I wrot Capt. Castleton, he being dead.

Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, sent me 3 _barsos_ wyne, 3 drid
salmon, and a lynen _catabra_ for a present.

_August 3._--I sent a note to Tonomon Samme of such sortes of
merchandiz as we had in our shipp, and withall desird that no _bongew_
might be sufferd to remeane abord, it being a scandall to our nation as
also against our prevelegese, which never had any such matter offred
till now.

After nowne Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, accompanid with Unagense
Dono and Soyemon Dono, came to thenglish howse, and at same tyme Capt.
Speck came also per water. So I made them colation. And Tonomon Samme
departed, biding me unlade our goodes when we would. Capt. Speck came
to heare news and brought me 3 bottells Spa. wyne.

Tonomon Same sent to have a parrat which was in our shipp, which was
thought good to buy of the carpenter and geve hym. Also I sent a munky
to Taccamon Dono. Both which presentes were taken in good parte. And
Mr. Wedmer, master mate, gave me a parakita, and the chirurgion gave me
the munky I gave Taccamon Dono.

This day was a Japon rosted to death, runing rownd about a post, fyre
being made about hym. The occation was for staling a small bark of
littell or no vallue.

_August 4._--The Japons and Chinas unladed their goodes, because they
did lie on the top of ours. And we rec. ashore 2 chists silk, no. 14
and no. 20, but the rope broke in taking up no. ----; soe it fell
into the water and was much endomaged by watering; but we washed it
forthwith in fresh water.

Flying newes came that Capt. Adams junck is arived in Xaxma, but of no
certenty.

I wrot a letter to Gonrok Dono about my processe: seeing it could not
be ended nether heare nor at Langasaque, I ment to remove it to Miaco.
Also I advised hym of the arivall of our ship _Adviz_ and what sortes
goodes she brought.

_August 5._--After daylight was don the last night, word came that the
Hollandes junk was arived neare unto Langasaque, haveng byn almost 2
monthes on the way, so that dyvers are dead for want of water and all
the rest full of the skervie. God send us good news of ours, for she
was ready to com away with the other.

We rec. ashore this day out of th' _Adviz_ 16 chist of silk.

An Englishman came to thenglish howse, and secretly willed me to take
heed how I accompanid the Duch or did eate or drink with them, for
that they hated our nation mortally, and in all their councells (which
daily they held) they ordayned and coyned articles against as how we
abused them, and fermed it with all their handes, to send for England
to their embassador, to stur up the Kinges Majesty of England against
us his naturall subjectes. And, amongst the rest, he tould me of a
Hollandes trick (worse then a Flemish) which they used, and was, when
they had forcably taken the pocession of Poolaway from our English,
it being rendred up to the Kinges Majesty of England, they called a
generall counsell upon it, and forsably made an English merchant, whom
they thretned with death, to sett his hand to a writing how he sould
2 peeces of ordinance to the blacks (or Mores) which brought them
downe bownd from the fortresse, although they were sent on per the
Hollanders to doe it. Which 2 peeces they ment to send for England with
a glavering falce letter to exskewse themselves, laying the falt on the
Mores, and that by the Hollanders meanes our mens lyves were saved.

This night began the feast of _bonbon_,[252] or for the dead, with
hanging out of candell light, and enviting the dead, etc.

_August 6._--This mornyng the Duch junk from Syam entred into the
harbour of Firando. They say our junk was ready to departe within 2 or
3 daies after them.

The Hollandes ship being to be brought in this feast day, they could
get no men; soe Capt. Speck sent to desire me to lend hym our bark (or
_foy foney_), which I did, with 16 ores to toe them in, they haveinge
sent theirs before with 20 ores to helpe our shipp in. So the _Red
Lyon_ that was cast away was made tite and brought in this day.

And I wrot a letter to Gonrok Dono, in answer of his, that I apealed to
the Emperor, and would not stand to his sentence.

We rec. out of the _Adviz_ this day, viz.: silke, 18 chistes; bayes, 1
bale; brod clo., 10 fard.; cony skins, 2 bales, these most parte rotton
and spoild; wax, 6 _catty_.

There was a greate eclips of the moone this night past, about 3 a clock
after midnight, which Mr. Nealson and Mr. Totton observed, to find the
true longetude of this towne of Firando, which standeth in 32½ degrees
of latetude to the northward of the equenoctiall; and the stars they
observed weare the Bulls eye and Hercus, the goate, I being present
when she was halfe darkened, and the Bulls eye was 46 degrees above the
horison, and Hercus 46 degrees and 40 minutes; and when she was wholy
discovered the Bull eye 52 ----[253]min.

_August 7._--Before dyner Ed. Sayer arived at Firando and brought me
in a letter from Capt. Adames, dated in Goto, 3th current, advising
he hath fownd but a loosing voyage, 800 _taies_ at least. Also that
the King of Cochinchina is well contented our nation shall trade into
his cuntrey; but the cheefe men about hym, as it should seeme, weare
axesary to the death of Mr. Peacock, and had parted the Companies
goodes amongst them, with his host the Japon, whoe fled away whilest
they were in Cochinchina, fearing to be brought in question.

So I retorned answer to Capt. Adames per the bark brought Ed. Sayer,
unto whome was paid 4 _taies_ small plate, and a bag rise; and a peece
damaske sent the _bongew_ Musioyen Dono, cost 4 R. 8, with a letter
complementall.

And there was rec. out of the _Adviz_, viz.: brod clo., 2 bales;
perpetuano,[254] 1 bale; wax, 9 cakes; quicksilver, 3 chistes; 7
hhds. drugs cacha;[255] 5 hampers pochok;[256] 3 hampers silk; 1 bale
kersies; 1 bale lambskins, all spoild and rotton, not one skin left
sownd, and 280 stark spoild; with 2 other bales cony skins, all in very
bad taking.

_August 8._--The China Capt. went to Goto this day to Niguan his
kinsman, whoe is come in his junk from Cochinchina. Unto whome I sent a
barill _morofack_ and a littell pott green ginger.

And we rec. ashore this day out of _Adviz_ nyne hundred and seventy
bars of leade.

The ij _bongews_ of our shipp _Adviz_ came to the English howse and
fell a swaggaring, and gave us bad wordes about the stealing of Mr.
Tottons coate, and, doe what I could, I could not get them out of
the howse. So I was forced to send Mr. Osterwick with a _jurebasso_
to Tonomon Samme, or Taccamon Dono, to comand them out of our howse,
because we could not be in quiet for them. But the noble men were gon a
hunting, and the brablars departed when they thought good.

_August 9._--The China Capt. retorned back, the wind being contrary,
and went not to Goto.

_August 10._--The kinges brother sent back the parrot I gave hym, to
keepe her, she being sick, or I rather think to have a better present
sent in place, for the parrot is well. He also sent word he would use
the _bonyews_ no more abord.

I rec. a letter from Gonrok Dono, tuching my proces with Casanseque,
that he wisheth it might be ended heare in Firando, and not sent above.
Also he adviseth me to send word to Safian Dono of goodes com in our
ship, and not sell any till we know what themperour will take. God send
merchantes, and then I meane to sell.

_August 11._--Naquan the China arived from Cochinchina this moryning,
and left junk at Goto; and meane to unlade ther silk theare and carry
it to Langasaque, because men are misused heare. And soe the Japons
meane to doe the lyke with that com in Capt. Adams junk.

The China Capt. came in hast and tould me that he had news the Emperour
was much offended with the Hollanders, because they had taken the China
junks, stryking his hand on his thigh 3 times when he first heard it,
saying he would not suffer them to doe it.

We rec. six hundred and seventy bars lead out of the _Adviz_; and
Gonrok sent word to have all our lead for themperour, of which I
desired a bill of [hym].

Word was brought towardes night that Capt. Adames junk was on the
backsyde of the iland of Firando, and sent for boates to toe hym in.
Soe I sent out our _foy fone_; as also the _tono_ sent out divers other
barkes. But it was past midnight before she came in, the tide being
against them. He came to vizet me, I not being well, and tould me the
King of Cochinchina knew nothing of the murdering of Mr. Peacock, but
that he was cast away per casualty.

_August 12._--We rec. 215 bars, I say two hundred and fyfteene bars
lead ashore out of th' _Adviz_, which is the whole complement of lead,
being 2065 bars in all. So now all goodes are rec. out of th' _Adviz_.

_August 13._--Gonrok Donos man with ij of Tonomon Sammes men came and
looked on our lead, and took one bar for sample to shew Gonrok Dono,
containing 43 _ll_ Eng. was 33 _cattis_ Japon, the price at 6 _tais
picull_; all staid for themperour. As alsoe they tak all the Hollanders
have, Syam lead and other; but that is not soe good.

There was rec. ashore out of Capt. Adams junk, viz. 2 chistes
merchandizs, 1 bale galles, retorned unsould from Cochinchina; 2
chistes aguila, 2 hampers silk, bought at Cochinchina.

The chirurgion of the _Adviz_ now com, called Benjamyn Parsons, being
(as I take it) drunken, met the Duch fiscall in the streete, and, like
a bestly knave as he was, gerded out ... telling hym it was for the
Hollanders. Wherupon he cam to thenglish howse and complained; but at
that tyme I was ill at ease, and did not speake with hym; otherwaies
he had been punished according to his desertes. But after, the said
fiscall beged his pardon. This chirurgion is a drunken quarelsom fello.

_August 14._--The servant of Gonrok dono with 2 of the kinges servantes
came to thenglish howse to have set my hand to a China letter, how I
had 500 _pico_ lead, at 6 _tais_ per _pico_, for themperor, and not
under. And in the meane tyme, as we were debating the matter (I denying
to set my ferme to any such writinges I knew not), came the China
Capt., and tould me they had set downe 5000 _piculls_ for 500. In fine,
I denid seting hand to any writing, although they aledged that Capt.
Speck had, for 600 _pico_, Syam lead, now com in their junck.

Also the kinges brother sent to have me send to Langasaque about my
plito with Casanseque, the scrivano; which I denyed, desiring justice
here.

_August 15._--I carid a present to Tonomon Samme, viz.:--

  2 _tatta._ sad blew cloth,
  ½ a kersy, pepper green,
  ½ a pec. naro perpetuano,
  1 pece fustian,
  1 _catty_ calemback,

which he seemed to take in good parte; and I desird of hym to have a
bark to cary up the Emperours present, which he answerd me he would
look out for.

_August 16._--I gave Niquan, the China, 1¼ _tatta_ black cloth, fyne
cloth, in respeck he (as I think) taketh paines about our entrance into
China.

And ther was a present geven Taccamon Dono, cheefe justice:--

  1¼ _tatta._ sad blew.
  2 _tatt._ carsyes, pepper green.
  ¼ peec. naro perpetuano.
  ½ a peec. fustion.
  1 _catty_ calemback.

We began to way out the lead for themperour, but they brought 2 falce
beames, one over 6 per cento, and thother 4 per cento. So we gave over;
and they carid 4 bars to Langasaque, waying 115 _cattis_ per our beame,
to try it per kinges beame theare.

The China Capt. gave me a peece yello shagy velvett.

_August 17._--I rec. a letter from the King of Firando, from Miaco,
wherin he advized me to mak hast up, for that themperour would retorne
back within a month.

One of the _Advizes_ company died this day, called Yewen Lake, whome
was coffend and carid to the Christian buriall place, with a hearse (or
coveryng) of black bayes carid over hym.

Oyen Dono came and viseted me to day, telling me it was best to reserve
the greatest parte of the present for the King of Firando till his
coming to Firando.

_August 18._--We laid out and packed up our cargezon goodes to cary to
Miaco for presentes and otherwais, with an over plus to sel or bring
back.

Mr. Wickham, according to his accustomed use, set me at nought, geveing
me bad words, as Capt. Adams and others can witnes, saying his tyme was
out, and that he would goe for England, and serve the Company no longer.

We had much a doe with the brabling Japons which came out of England,
they demanding more then their due, as 10 _taies_ for 3 mo., when per
my book most of them had but 7½ _tais_ per 3 mo., and the most (which
was but one) had but 29 _mas_ per month, and demanded 350 _tais_ for
their losses in England; and, had not Mr. Wickham brought a writing
from Bantam of 150 Rs. of 8 rec. per them there, in consideration of
the said losses, with all their ferms at it, they would have put us
to much trouble. And one of them took Capt. Adames by the throte in
his owne lodging, because he would not stand out for them that all
the money they receved impres, at Capt. Saris being heare, was geven
them gratis; and thought to have laid violent handes one Mancho, the
_jurebasso_, because he witnessed the truth. I had much a doe to hold
my handes that I had not cut affe one or two of their heades, which I
make no dowbt but I might well have answerd.

_August 19._--Here came flying speeches of 3 junkes arived at Goto, one
of which is thought to be ours.

And it was thought fyt to geve two presents unto the China Capt.,
Andrea Dittis, at Firando, and his brother, Capt. Whowe, at Langasaque,
viz.:

  ¼ of black broad perpetuano.
  ¼ of haircullr naro perpetuano.
  ½ a peec. fustion.

I say to each of them thus much, in hope of their travill to procure
trade into China.

_August 20._--The Hollanders went up this day towardes themperour. So
their shipps shot affe ordinance at their departure, viz. Albartus,
Matias, and Mr. Barkhoult were sent on this busynes.

And we are ready to departe, but can get no bark, but words of the
kinges offecers; soe we are determined to hire a bark of Sackay.

_August 21._--This evenyng arived a junk from Cochinchina, being put
on the cost of Corea, and bringeth word a junk is without, her mast
cut overbord, which we esteem to be ours, and therefore send out our
_foyfon_ with victuelles and fresh water, they being in destress. Also
the China Capt. junk arived from Tonkyn at [night].

The Hollanders departed toward the Cort this morning, and shot affe
much ordenance from abord shipps and at howse.

We, being driven off from tyme to tyme per the _tono_, hired a bark of
Sackay to carry up the present, for 80 _tais_ plate bars, besides a bar
plate for master and another to company.

A junk from Cochinchina entred late this night, her lading for Chinas
of Cochinchina.

_August 22._--There came in a small junk of China very late this night,
laden with pursalon, or China vessells.

_August 23._--I gave Robert Haley, the chirurgion, ten _taies_ for som
other matters he formerly had geven me.

I delivered two hundred _tais_ to Mr. Osterwick to lay out in my
abcense to Miaco. And I delivered up 3 memorialls, viz. 1 to Mr. Wm.
Nealson; 1 to Mr. Jno. Osterwick; 1 to Ed. Sayer, for hym selfe and Mr.
Wm. Eaton--all of what I would have donne in my abcense at Miaco, as
appeareth by coppie.

So we laded all our goods abord the bark for Miaco. And coming to
knowledge that the mutenose Japons which are com out of England had put
up a petission against me to the justice, that I would not pay them
their wagis, I made answer to yt of their villanos cariadge and falce
slandering of me, I being ready to pay them their due owing to them, as
Capt. Adames and Mansho the _jurebasso_ are witnesses at bargen making,
and as I set it downe in my book.

_August 24._--The kinges brothers, Tonomon Samme, sent me word to pay
the brabling marreners Japons which came out of England, according as
I had agreed with them, and for the rest of our processe, to make it
knowne to the king his brother at Miaco, who noe dowbt would take order
to geve me content. He also sent me word he would send a _bongew_ with
me to assist me in my busenes on the way; but I retorned hym answer it
was needles, the king his brother being above.

The China Capt. retornd from Goto, and is of the opinion that our junk,
the _Sea Adventure_, is put into Tushma, and that it is she which lost
her maine mast. God send us good news of her.

_August 25._--I paid Mr. Nealson ten _pozos_ and twenty _taies_ in
plate bars for the matters following, viz.:--

                                               _ta. ma. co._
  For a embrawdred velvett quilt, 5 R. 8, is    04   0   0
  For halfe pec. wroght velvet, 5 R. 8, is      04   0   0
  For 60 musk cods, at 4 _mas_ pec., is         20   0   0

There was a difference betwixt the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, and Mr.
Nealson, he denying fyftie _taies_ that the China Capt. fownd per acco.
he had delivered unto hym, the one and other standing stiffly in their
opinion.

Mr. Osterwick paid fowre hundred and two _taies_ plate bars to the
Japon mareners which came out of England.

_August 26._--The wether being soe fowle both yisterday and this
mornyng staid us from seting forwardes towardes themperours court, all
things being ready laden abord.

About 10 a clock we departed from Firando to goe to Miaco; and the
_Adviz_ shot affe 7 pec. ordinance, as also the Hollandes ship shot
affe 5 with 8 from the Hollandes howse. Soe we got to Languay[257]
this night, wheare we staid at an ancor till som 2 howers before day,
it being calme, and then, the tide coming, waying ancor we rowed away.
Capt. Adames went with us in a bark of his owne, as also 3 or 4 other
barks the lyke, on being our hostis of Bingana Tomo.

_August 27._--This mornyng calme wether, and after, wynd variable
per fittes, sometyme calme, with lightning and thunder towardes the
northward, with much rayne, the wind vering, a storme to N.E.; soe
that we constrayned to enter into a port of Faccata, called Imatds,
16 leagues from Lanquay. At which place we had newes that our junk,
the _Sea Adventure_ was entred into Tushma 3 daies past, many of her
men being dead. Also the junk which we heard had lost her meanemast
entred into a harbor of Faccata 5 daies past. She came from Tonkyn. Of
which I advised in a letter to Firando directed to Mr. Nealson and Mr.
Osterwick, as also of our arivall heare.

_August 28._--We went ashore at Imatds, I being very ill at ease,
as Capt. Adames did the like the night before. I think we had eaten
or drunken somthing that was not good, so I drank a littell rose a
Solas,[258] which presently made me to vomet, which did me much ease;
and late at night I drunke a littell bezas ston, which gave me much
paine most parte of night, as thought 100 wormes had byn knawing at my
hart; yet it gave me ease afterward.

_August 29._--Som 3 howers before day we departed from Imatds onwardes
on our voyage and paid the howse, viz. to the host for use of his howse
1 bar plate, containing 3 : 1 : 0, and to his wife for to buy oyle, 0 :
5 : 0.

_August 30._--With much a doe this day we got to Shiminaseake within
night, yt proving stormy wether, with rayne, wind S.erly per night.

_August 31._--At this place we understood the Corean embassadors
departed from hence yesterday in the mornyng with 450 men in their
company, Coreans, 3 of them being princepall, and all goe in like
authoretie. The Emperour hath geven charg to use them respectively in
all pleases wheare they passe, as hath byn both at Tushma, Ishew, of
Firando, Faccata, and this place of Shimenaseak, new howses being built
for receapt of them in eache place, with boates to convay them per
sea and horse and _neremons_ (or litters) per land, all at themperour
of Japons cost. Som report (and are the commons) that they are com to
render obaysance and pay tribute, otherwaies themperour would have made
wars against them againe. But others are of a contrary opinion, that
they com to entreate the [Emperour] that them of Tushma may trade noe
more into Corea, but rather that the Coreans may com to Tushma or other
partes of Japon.

I wrot a letter to Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick to same effect as
my former from Imadts, as also that Coreans passed from Shimina Seak
yisterday, and left this letter with our host at Ximinaseak to send for
Firando.

So we paid our host at Ximina, for diet and howsrom the night past and
till nowne to day, 4 _taies_. And so departed from Ximina Seak, haveing
a stiff gale wynd, W.erly, somtyme S.erly, and somtymes northerly, all
rest day and night following. Soe that the next day in the mornyng we
weare at a place called Yew,[259] 45 leagues from Ximina Seak, haveing
out gon the Coreans this night past.

_September 1._--I met Neyamon Dono as he passed towardes Firando. Soe,
per meanes of contrary windes, we stoped tides, and got this day and
night following to son rising 20 leagues, 10 leagues short of Bingana
Tomo.[260]

_September 2._--I wrot an other letter to Firando to Mr. Nealson and
Mr. Eaton, and delivered it to our hostis of Bingana Tomo to send unto
them, she metting with us at sea near Bingano Tomo, yet went from
Firando 3 daies before us.

We went into Bingana Tomo to stay tide, where our host sent me a
_barso_ wyne and a baskit peaches.

So we passed Bingana Tomo vij leagues, and came to ancor at a wast
iland, haveing made this day and night following xvij leagues.

_September 3._--This day and night following we made but xiij leagues,
geting to an ancor at a place called Wishmado, 10 leagues to short of
Moro.[261]

_September 4._--Wee gott this day and night following to the bar of
Osaky by son rising, having made per day and night 40 leagues.

_September 5._--At our arivall at Osaky our host Cuimon Dono was at
Miaco, and the king Firando sent a man to accompany us to hym, with 2
horses for me and Mr. Wickham.

This fello tould me that the Hollanders, per councell of Jno. Yossen,
went directly to Fushamy to themperour, without making the King of
Firando accoynted with the matter; but were by Codgkin Dono and Oyen
Dono put back to bring a _bongew_ of the King of Firandos, before they
could be admitted audience. But (as he sayeth) the Emperour hath taken
the present was brought per them.

I wrot 2 letters to Magozemon Dono and Cuemon Dono, and sent them per
Co Jno., _juerabasso_, whom I gave order to goe to the King of Firando
and tell hym of our arivall, and that I expected Capt. Adames coming
this night or to morrow, and then ment to com to vizet his Highnesse,
and tak his councell for delivery of the King of Englandes letter and
present to themperour.

Mr. Wickham paid the barkmen for rest of the fraight xxx _tais_, as
also 1 bar to the master containing 3 : 2 : 5, and an other bar to the
marreners containing 3 : 9 : 3. And I gave 6 _mas_ to a marener which
had his coate blowne over board. This money our host sonne laid out for
me. I gave 2 musk cods, with 2 piktures of our Lady, the Infant Christ,
and Christ crowned with thorne, paynted upon copper in China very
lively.

_September 6._--Co Jno. retorned this night late with a letter from
the King of Firando, whoe took it in good parte that I sent hym unto
hym to adviz hym of our arivall, a thing which the Hollanders had
neclected at their arivall, which gave hym much discontent, soe that I
should find he would doe his best endevour for our English nation to
geve themperour truly to understand the difference he fownd betwixt the
Hollanders and English, wishing me to make what hast I could before the
Corean ambassadors arived. And after Co Jnos departure he sent an other
_bongew_ to thank me for sending to hym the day before, and, as it
should seeme; condemnyng the Hollanders for their proceading. Yet I doe
consider this may be donne at thinstegation of the Hollanders, seting
the King of Firando on to sownd me what I would say against them.

Our host at Fuxamy sent his man to bid me welcom, and expecting my
coming to his howse.

And Cuimon Dono, our host of Osakay, retorned from Miaco, telling me
wonders of the bad reportes was geaven out against the Hollanders, and
good of thenglish, etc.

_September 7._--I wrot an other letter to Firando to Mr. Nealson and
Osterwick, and sent it per an other barkman of Tome Dono. And as I was
a writing of yt, the Corean ambassadors passed throw this towne per
water in very pompeouse sort, they being royally entertayned all the
way per themperours comand, and had trumpetts and hobboyes sounding
before them in 2 or 3 severall placese.

I advised I ment to departe for Miaco to morrow, and, yf Capt. Adames
came not this night, would leave a letter for hym to follow after, and
send away presentes this night for Fuxamy.

And within night the ould man of Orengaua brought me a letter from
Capt. Adames, dated in Takasanga[262] yisterday, 22 leagues short
of Osaky, signefying the danger he passed the 31th ultimo, a leake
springing in his bark, weting and spoiling all his goodes, she being
ready to sink under them. So, not having tyme to writ to Firando, I
sent his letter in myne dated yisterday. He writes how he changed bark.
And this day the ould man sayeth he thinketh he will be heare, I meane
to morrow.

_September 8._--We being ready to departe towards Miaco, Capt. Adames
arived at Osakay. And it began to rayne. Soe our voyag was put offe
till to morrow.

Our host, Magazayemon Dono of Miaco, and Maky Dono came to vizet me, as
the King of Firandos host and others did the lyke bring presentes of
figges, peares, and other frute.

_September 9._--We departed this mornyng from Osakay towardes Miaco,
where we arived this night, only to speake with the King of Firando
before we came to Fushamy, where the Emperour la. So, late towardes
night after our arivall, the King of Firando sent me a present of 4
_barsos morofack_, and 20 bags or paper packets of fyne white beaten
rise; and Semi Dono a banketing box stuff, _nifon catange_ (or Japon
fation), with many complementall wordes of offers of greate frendshipp,
and in som sort complayning of the Hollanders proceadinges, attributing
all to the folly of Jno. Yosson.

_September 10._--I wrot a letter to Firando to Mr. Nealson and Mr.
Osterwick, and sent it per Magazemon Donos man, advising of our arivall
heare, and the report the Hollanders did look for their dispach
yisterday, and that the Castillanos had theirs the day before.

We went to the _Tono_ or King of Firando, and carid hym a present as
followeth, viz. halfe a peece of Denshier kersie, halfe a peece of blak
broad perpetuano, halfe a peece of fustion; and to Semedone, viz. a
vest black perpetuano and ½ pec fustion.

I had much conferrance with hym about our busynes, namely, how we
should procead to have our previlegese enlarged that were shortned
the yeare past; unto which he promised his assistance, willing us, as
Semi Dono did the lyke, to geve out the worst speeches we could of the
Hollanders, that it might com to themperours eares.

And towardes night we retorned to Fushamy, I geveing our hostis of
Miaco 2 musk cods, with 3 picturs, as afforesaid.

At our arivall at Fushamy, I sent our _jurebasso_ to adviz Safian Dono
of our coming; as I did the like to Cacayezamon Dono, secretary to Oyen
Dono, and Torazemon Dono of Firando, whome only of the 3 was in howse,
and afterwards sent me a barrell wyne for a present, and word that he
would com to me in the mornyng to consider about our busynes.

_September 11._--I sent our _jurebasso_ againe to Cacayezamon Dono,
to tell hym I would gladly speake with hym. And, sowne after, he
came, being accompanid with Torazemon Dono, and, after many wordes of
complemento, he tould me that he thought themperour would lett us have
any thinge that in reason we would demand; and that the Hollanders
had their dispach, and was that, notwithstanding the petitions put up
against them, both by Spaniardes, Portingals, and Chinas, to have them
banished out of Japon as pirattes and sea rovars, he gaine said it,
and tould them his cuntrey was free for all strangers, and that, yf
any private quarrell weare betwixt them, they might seeke remedy at
their owne princes. But the Chinas replid, and said they had no private
quarell with them. "Well", said themperour, "where took they your
goodes from yow?" And they answered, at Manillias. "Whie then" said he,
"goe to the Manillias for your redresse. But yf they come within my
jurisdictions, I will see yow righted."

Capt. Adames came to Fuxamy this mornyng, haveing byn first at Miaco,
and spoak with the King of Firando, who used hym respectively in
extraordenary sort: the reason he gathered was for fear we should
complaine against hym, as the Hollanders had donne, which yf it
happened, he would be shifted out of his government or heritage; but,
considering he oweth our honble. employers so much money, it is better
to beare for a tyme.

Albartus and Matias, the Hollanders, came to vizet me at my lodging at
same tyme when Cacayemon Dono and Torazemon Dono weare with me, but
staid not, only tould me they ment to departe towardes Firando within a
day or two.

_September 12._--Capt. Adames went to day and spoak with Oyen Dono and
Codgskin Dono, themperours secretaries, to know when we might have
audience and deliver our present. They gave hym good wordes, and willed
hym to retorne to morrow mornyng and he should have answere.

The Hollanders came all 3 this day to vizet me; and, as it seemed to me
by their speeches, they goe not away with much content, as not haveing
their privelegese enlarged.

_September 13._--Shongo Dono the admeralls sonne sent me a present of a
barill wyne and a box of stuffe like pack thrid, made of wheate flower,
which the Japons use in brothes at bankets.

And I wrot a letter to Firando to Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick,
dated yisterday but kept till to day, and sent per Mr. Albartus, the
Hollanders retornyng towardes Firando this night per water to Osakay.

We carid and delivered our present to themperour with the King of
Englands letter this after nowne, as followeth:--

From the Kinges Ma^{tie}:

  4 _tatta._ of scarlet.
  1 halfe pec. sad blew cloth, no. 291, containing 14½ yardes.
  1 halfe pec. hairculler, no. 121, containing 16 yardes.
  1 halfe peec. yello, no. 227, containing 17 yardes.
  1 pec. Denshier kersey, purple in grain.
  1 pec. eidem kersey, yello.
  1 pec. broad black parpetuano.
  1 pec. eidem white perpetuano.
  3 peeces fustions.
  1 furd gowne ruskin bellies.
  1 contor[263] Lady Smith, valued at forty mark str.

From the Company:

  51 _cattis_ raw silk.
  68 _cattis_ wax.
  1 halfe pec. brod clo. fawne culler, no. 286, containing 16½ yardes.
  1 halfe pec. black fyne, no. 589, containing 16 yardes.
  1 rem. bayes yello, containing 13½ yardes.
  1 rem. eidem black, containing 11¾ yardes.
  5 blak cuny skins.
  50 white lambskins.
  50 black and red lambskins.
  50 fitchet skins.
  10 _piculls_ of lead.

_September 14._--We carid and deliverd these presents following, viz.:

To Oyen Dono, Emperours secretary:

  1 _tatta._ skarlet.
  2 _tatt._ black clo.
  2 _tatta._ sad blew.
  2 _tatta._ yello.
  2 _tatta._ hairculler.
  1 pec. blak perpetuano, brod.
  ½ pec. kersy.
  1 pec. fustion.
  25 white lamb skins.
  25 blak cony skins.
  3 bundelles white silk, containing 17½ _cattis_.

And to Codgskins Dono the lyke, but no silke; as also a narro peec
perpetuano, and Oyen Dono broad.

Also to 3 others, viz.:--

  To Tushma Dono   }
  To Otto Dono     } three of themperours councell.
  To Kenuske Dono  }

To Kenuske Dono:

  2 _tatta._ black clo.
  2 _tatta._ hairculler.
  2 _tatta._ sad blew.
  2 _tatta._ strawculer.
  1 perpetuano, narrow.
  1 pec. fustion.
  ½ peece yello kersie.
  25 black lamskins.

And to Tushma Dono and Oto Dono, viz. each alike:

  2 _tatta._ black clo.
  2 _tatta._ straw culler.
  2 _tatt._ fawne culler.
  2 _tatta._ blak bayes.
  ½ a kersey, culler green, containing 2{~VULGAR FRACTION SEVEN EIGHTHS~} _tatta._
  ½ perpetuano, containing 5{~VULGAR FRACTION SEVEN EIGHTHS~} _tatta._
  1 pec. fustion.

_September 15._--We carid the presentes following, viz.:--

To Inga Dono, cheefe justice of Japon:

  2 _tatta._ black clo. fyne.
  2 _tatta._ fawneculler.
  2 _tatt._ strawculler.
  ½ pec. kersy, green, containing 2{~VULGAR FRACTION SEVEN EIGHTHS~} _tatta._
  ½ peec. perpetuano, containing 5{~VULGAR FRACTION SEVEN EIGHTHS~} _tatta._
  1 peece fustion.

And to his secretary, viz.:

  3¾ _tat._ perpetuano.

And to Safion Dono, viz.:

  1¼ _tatta._ black fyne clo.
  1¼ _tatta._ fawne culler.
  2½ _tatta._ blak perpetuano.
  ½ peec. karsye, willo culler, 2{~VULGAR FRACTION SEVEN EIGHTHS~} yardes.
  ½ pece fustion.

And to Shongo Dono, admerall:

  1¼ _tatta._ fyne blak clo.
  2½ _tatta._ black perpetuano.
  4 _tatta._ fustion, is ½ peec.

Also Inga Dono sent me a present of 10 _catabras_ or cotes: 5
_catabras_ (or coates) of silke, 5 ditto of lynen. And he sent 2 of
silk and 3 of lynen to Capt. Adames, he haveing geven hym a present of
_ginco_ (or a kind of lignum allowaies).

And towardes night the Kyng of Firando sent Capt. Adames a very fayre
_cattabra_ for a present, with wordes of complemento, as yt should
seeme because he had (as our _jurebasso_) tould Semi Dono playnely how
we have of late byn misused at Firando in all occations whatsoever,
contrary to themperours edict, etc.

_September 16._--We sent presents as followeth, viz.:--

To Oyen Donos 2 secretaries:

  3¾ blak perpetuano.
  {~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} parte of a peec fustion.
  2 _tatta._ ¼ blak perpetuano.
  {~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} parte of peec. fustion.

To Taffian Dono, Codgskin Donos secretary:

  2 _tatta._ ¼ black perpetuano.
  2 _tatt._ ¼ ditto, other secretary.

And I rec. letters from Tome Dono, from Edo, that he was sick and could
not com to be our _jurebasso_; with an other from Yodayo Dono, Neyamon
Donos partner, and on from Neyamon Donos wife, both complementall.

I gave Domingo, my boy, and his sister, viz.:--

1 pec. corse damaske, cost 1 _ta._ 6 _ma._ 0 _co._, to hym; 1 pec. red
taffety, cost 8 _ma._, to her.

_September 17._--This mornyng we went to Oyen Donos howse and to
Codgskin Dono, to deliver up our petition to have our privilegese
enlarged; but they were gon to the castell. Soe Capt. Adames went after
them with it.

And Mr. Wickham went to Miaco to see yf he can make sales of our goods;
for which purpose he hath carid musters with hym.

Capt. Adames staid all day at castell, and in the ende shewed the
petition to the councell, who willed hym to retorne with it to morrow,
for then it was to late.

_September 18._--We went againe to the councell, and spoake with Oyen
Dono, who gave me good wordes, and willed Capt. Adames to com to the
castell and he would doe what he could to procure our despach.

Also I went and viseted Torazemon Dono, of Firando, and carid hym a
present, viz. 2 _tata._ 7 inches black perpetuano, {~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} of a peec. of
fustion.

And I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham, to Miaco, to look out for 6
_piculls_ gunpolder; advising allso that Capt. Adames had delivered a
bar plate to Mr. Jno. the _bos_ (or scribe) upon acc. for his writing,
containing 4 _ta._ 3 _m._ 2_co._

And towardes night Cacayemon Dono and Torazemon Dono came to vizet me
with many complementall words, and tould me it was no dowbt but our
previlegese would be enlarged.

I sent Co. Jno., our _jurebasso_, to accompany Cacayemon Dono to his
lodging with a present as followeth, viz. 2 _tat._ 7 inches black
perpetuano, {~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} of a peece of fustion.

And I rec. a letter from Miaco from Mr. Wickham, dated this day,
advising that he is offerd but a symple price for our silk, etc.

_September 19._--Capt. Adames went againe this mornyng to the Court,
being retorned yisternight with answer he should com againe this
mornyng, he haveinge sat theare all yisterday from mornyng till night
without eating anything, as he had donne the lyke the day before.

I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham, in answer of his, and sent it per
expres to Miaco from Fushamy.

Capt. Adames did nothing this day nether, in respect the Coreans weare
dispached at Cort, and all the _tonos_ to the westward had leave to
retorne to their cuntries.

Also the ould _direy_, or pope of Japon, died this day.[264]

_September 20_ (_Conguach 1_).--Yt is said the Coreans sent a present
to themperour, and made their case knowne wherefore they were sent from
the King of Corea to hym; which was, first to vizet the sepulcre, or
doe funerall rights to the deceased Emperour Ogosho Samma, and next
to rejoyce with his Ma^{tie}. that now is in that he had soe quietly
succeaded his father without wars or bloudshed, and lastly to desire
his Ma^{tie} to have the Coreans under his protection as his father had
before hym, and to defend them against forraine envations, yf any other
nation did seeke to disturbe their quiet, etc.

I wrot an other letter to Mr. Wickham per expres, to look out at the
_tono_ of Tushmas lodging yf the Coreans were ready to departe, to the
entent to vizet them before they goe and to carry them a present.

And Capt. Adames retornyng againe to the Cort, I wrot a letter to Oyen
Dono, themperours secretary, to desire his Lordships favour for our
quick dispach and enlardging of our previlegese. But nothing was donne
this day by meanes all the _tonos_ vizeted the Emperour with presents.

And news came to Cort of the death of one of themperours doughters,
whoe was married to a great prince.

_September 21._--I went this mornyng to Miaco, to vizet the Coreans,
leving capt. Adames to follow sute at Court; but I could not be
permitted to speak with the Coreans per meanes of the King of Tushma,
he being gelouse we might get trade into Corea, which non other are
permitted but the Tushmeans.

_September 22._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham not to goe any more
to Tushma Tono, nor his secretary, till he heard ferther from me, I
haveing now emploid Cacayemon Dono to speake to Oyen Dono, his master,
to know his pleasure, whether I might be admitted speech with the
Coreans or no.

Capt. Adames went againe to the Court and there remeaned all day till
toward night, and then the councell sent the King of Englandes letter
to be translated into the Japon tong, which was donne, and he willed to
retorne againe to morow.

This day all the Japon lords or _tonos_ went to vizet the Corean
ambassadors, carrying them greate presentes, a matter strang to see,
except it be they be set on per the Emperour to withdraw them from
favoring the King of China, etc.

_September 23._--I sent an other letter to Mr. Wickham with the coppie
of translation of King Englandes letter, to have Jean Dono to write out
two more.

Capt. Adames retorned from the Court with answer from the councell
that the Emperour would geve our Englishe nation no larger previlegese
then other strangers have, only to sell our merchandiz at Firando and
Langasaque. The reason he doth it is for that his owne merchants of
Japon shall have the profit of seling within land before strangers, as
also that, under culler of buying and seling, noe pristes may lurk up
and downe his cuntrey to alter religion as heretofore they have donne.
Of the which I advised Mr. Wickham in an other letter, to thentent he
use diligence to sell somthing, for that we shall not be sufferd to
stay long after the Emperour is departed.

_September 24._--I went this mornyng to Safian Dono to confer about our
matter of procese with scrivano, which he desired might stay till he
came downe to Langasaque, which should be shortly. Also he tooke notis
of what merchandiz we had to sell, and wrot a letter to Gonrok Dono to
take all lead for the Emperour and pay us ready money.

Torazemon Dono came to vizet me, telling me that Semi Dono was at Court
all this day to sue for his master the _Tono_ of Firando to retorne for
his howse or cuntrey, being very sick; but could have no answer. He
said the Kyng (or _Tono_) of Xaxma retorned for his cuntrey yisterday,
and to morow the _Tonos_ of Umbra and Goto have lycense to departe.

Ther is 2 noble men taken and brought to Court, their castell being
overthrowne, wherin was fownd store of war-lik provition of poulder,
shot, guns, and armor, but for what pretence I canot understand.

_September 25._--I wrot Mr. Wickham an other letter, in answer of his
rec. the night past, to make sales of silk, yf it be possible.

Yisterday, Oyen Dono, Codgskin Dono, and other of the Emperours
councell went to Miaco to vizet the Coreans, with a present from
themperour, so that we could doe nothing tuchng our dispach. But this
mornyng Capt. Adames went to Court about it, with our _jurebasso_, and
at night left our writeings with them to alter or amend them at their
pleasure and geve us ij _goshons_ for Cochinchina and Syam.

Mr. Wickham wrot me he had sould a small quantety of silk at 218 _ta.
pico_.

_September 26._--I wrot an other letter to Mr. Wickham to sell 10 or 12
chistes more of silk, although it weare at 215 _tais pico_ to delivr it
at Firando; for that money we must needes have to send in this shipp,
at what price soever we sell; and, now our prevelegese are lost, we
must not stay heare to procure sales; and we knew well ther were no
merchantes beloe, so that now the tyme to goe thorow or never.

Capt. Adames went againe to Court, but did nothing.

And Semi Dono sent me a letter to procure out a _goshon_ for hym for a
junk to goe for Tonkyn. But I retorned hym answer, he should pardon me,
for I had so much to doe with the lordes of the councell the other day
about my owne matters that I had no desire to enter into other mens nor
trouble them any more.

_September 27._--I wrot a letter to Firando with the 3 barelles
brimston, and sent it per Sinda Dono of Sackay, to send for Firando
per first. In this letter I advized of all is past, and that I think
it will be 15 or 20 daies before I shall be ready to goe for Firando,
and that they shall mak sales of any sort merchandiz.

Capt. Adames went againe to the Cort, but was referred till to morrow
for dispach.

Divers noble men sent to buy broad cloth and fustions, but I referd
them till Mr. Wickham came from Miaco, telling them I knew not whether
any such thinges were left ungeven or no, for I canot tell whether it
be donne to know whether we will sell heare or no.

_September 28._--I wrot Mr. Wickham answer of his letter rec. to make
an end of Grubstreet, our host, about the difference of his refusing
his bargin of silk bought; for I knew not whether he did it of purpose
to bring the matter before the justice to make it knowne we sell goodes
above, contrary to themperours edict.

And afterward Mr. Wickham came hym selfe to Fushamy to aske councell
about our proceadinges to make sales; and soe retorned for Miaco
againe. And sent by the man carid my letter in the mornyng 10 saks
of rozen or pitch, each waying 70 _cattis_, is 7 _picos_ at 3 _tais_
the _picull_. It be excellent good and duble the goodnes of former we
bought at Langasaque.

Capt. Adames remeaned most parte of day at Court to get our writinges
and dispach; and in the end left our _jurebasso_ to bring them away
when they weare sealed. But when the griffer or clark should have geven
them, he demanded the delivering in of our ould _goshon_ (or pasport)
for our junk for Syam, which we had not, our junk not being arived nor
no newes of her at our departure from Firando.

This day the Emperours two brothers came to viset hym, one being 16
years ould, houlding the castell of Shrongo, and the other som 2 yeares
yonger, houlding the castell at Langaw: two of the strongest fortresses
in Japon. So that all the _tonos_ of Japon went to accompany them.

_September 29._--I wrot an other letter to Mr. Wickham to look out for
Shoby Dono, to the entent to sell our junk to hym; and rec. answer, he
is not at Miaco. So I think he keepeth hym selfe out of way of purpose,
for that he oweth som 250 _taies_ to Hon^{ble} Company.

Capt. Adames was all day at Cort with our _jurebasso_, and in the end
got our writinges sealed. But, as they weare ready to be deliverd, in
reading our previlegese over, som one tooke exception that Langasaque
was put in as well as Firando. And soe they staid them till the next
day, to take _danco_, in parte that Oyen Dono, themperours secretary,
was abcent by means of the death of his wife newly happened.

_September 30._--I wrot an other letter to Mr. Wickham not to trust
Semi Dono nor any other with broad cloth except they brought ready
money, nether to send the cloth to any of their howses, but let them
com to our lodging and see it.

Capt. Adames went this mornyng to Court againe to get out our _goshon_,
and had them deliverd to hym sealed before nowne, Langasaque being put
in as well as Firando. But he was willed to stay till the rest of the
councell came, to see them read our [_goshon_] before he went away;
which in the end was donne. But Tushma Dono and others tooke exceptions
that Langasaque was put in, and soe would not let it passe but altered
it as before. Whereupon Capt. Adames replied that we cared not to have
our shiping goe for Langasaque, but only to sell our merchandiz. Unto
which Tushma Dono answerd that we might doe soe without puting any word
into our previlegese, having a letter formerly to that entent.

_October 1_ (_12th Conguach_).--I wrot an other letter to Mr. Wickham
of recept of his, as also that at present I had receved a letter from
Semi Dono, whoe very ernestly desireth to have vij _tatta_ broad cloth,
to pay for it 6 wickes hence at his arivall at Firando. So I advised
Mr. Wickham to let hym have it, taking his bill for payment, and, yf
he will pay any ready money, to receve it and put it on the bill or
shorten it on acco.

I desird Capt. Adames to goe againe to Cort, to get Goto and Shashma
put in for shiping, yf in case the _Tono_ of Firando did misuse us,
as, to say the truth, I can not bragg of any good usadg, yet lothe to
complaine. As also that thenglish desire to be in a place apart from
the Hollanders, as being of divers conditions. Yet, when all was donne,
we were glad to rest contented with matters as they formerly were. And
so Capt. Adames brought our previleges with 2 _goshons_, 1 for Syam and
the other for Cochinchina.

And themperour sent me word he would make noe answer to the King of
Englandes letter, nor send present, it being directed to his deceased
father, a thing helde ominous in Japon, but withall sent me a _cattan_
and 10 coates, and 10 coates to Capt. Adames, whereof we gave ether
of us one coate to Torazemon Dono, whome brought these thinges from
themperour.

Also I rec. a letter from Capt. Whaw, the China, with a present of
a jar green ginger. This China which brought it came to get out a
_goshon_ for Cochinchina.

And I rec. letters from Firando, dated the 7th, 8, and 9th ultimo, of
arivall _Sea Adventure_ from Syam at Firando, viz.:--

1 letter from Mr. Jno. Johnson and Richard Pit in Syam, May, 1616.

1 from Jno. Ferrers, from same place.

4 from Mr. Eaton, 2 dated in Tushma and 2 in Firando.

1 from Mr. Nealson, dated in Firando.

1 from Mr. Osterwick in Firando.

1 from Mr. Totton in Firando.

1 from Mr. Borges in Firando.

By which letters I also rec. our ould _goshon_ from Syam, and
delivered it in.

_October 2._--I sent two letters to Mr. Wickham per our host, one from
Mr. Eaton and thother from Mr. Osterwick for hym selfe, with one of Mr.
Eatons and another of Mr. Burges of myne to shew how hard a passadg our
junk had.

And soe Capt. Adames and I went to Oyen Donos to take our leave, where
we met Codgkin Dono and all the rest of the councell, who were ready to
set forward with the Emperour towardes Edo, he gooing to Otes[265] to
dyner.

And I wrot 4 letters for Firando, viz.:--1 to Mr. Eaton and Edmond
Sayer; 1 to Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick; 1 to Mr. Totton and Mr.
Bourges; and the fourth was to Mr. Jno. Johnson and Ric. Pittes for
Syam, to be sent in a junk from Langasaque. All these letters I sent
per Synda Dono with the 7 _pico._ rozen, to send both letters and
rozen forthwith for Firando ether from Osakay or Sakay, with 3 or 400
_gantes_ fysh oyle, yf it be to be had; and to that purpose wrot 2
letters to our host at Osakay and ostis at Sakay. Also I sent 2 letters
to China Capt. and Matinga.

_October 3._--We went this mornyng to Miaco, to dispache our busynes;
and, at our arivall theare, heard the King of Firando was ready to
departe to morow towardes his cuntrey.

Soe I went to vizet hym, Capt. Adames accompanying me. I tould hym
how we had byn misused at Firando in his abcense in all occations
whatsoever. He gave me good wordes and tould me he was sory for it, and
that all should be amended at his coming theare.

Also I got Capt. Adames to goe vizet the China which came from Capt.
Whaw, and to tell hym I was going to Miaco and, yf I could stand hym in
stid theare, he should fynd me ready. But he came presently after to me
hym selfe, to thank me, being ready to goe with us for that place, and
so to Edo, to take out 4 or 5 _goshoons_ for shiping, etc.

_October 4._--We went and vizeted Chubio Dono and carid hym a present,
viz.:--

  1¼ _tatta._ sad blew.
  2½ _tatta._ black perpetuano.
  ½ fustions.

He took it in kynd parte, offering us any frendship in his power.

And I sent the China a present ij barill wyne and 2 fyshes. And Sofy
the _boz_ sent me ij barilles wyne and 2 hense.

_October 5._--The _maky_ man envited us to dyner to day.

                                               _ta. ma. co._
  I bought a coate to geve W^{m}, cost          1   0   0
  2 pec. red silke lyne _keremons_, cost        3   3   0
  3 gerdellee to geve for presentes, cost       1   8   0

The _maky_ envited us to supper at a tavarne (or banketing howse),
where we were well entertayned.

And Mr. Jean the scribe had a bar plate geven hym in full payment
for his paynes taken in writing our petitions and other matters to
themperour and councell at Fuchamy.

Also I gave a bar plate to the tabarnar where we dyned, containing
4_ta._ 3_ma._ 0_co._

_October 6._--Capt. Adames sent a man expres to Firando, per whome I
wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton and the rest to same effect as my former.

Also we sent Capt. Adames man to Edo to bring away all the coast and
Cambaia cloth, as also such monies as may be made per Neamon Donos
partner in his abcense.

And I wrot letters to Capt. Adames wife and children, and sent them
for presents, viz.:--

  1 pec. white damask         }
  1 pickture                  } to Mrs. Adames.
  1 musk cod                  }
  1 pec. mingled culrd damask }
  2 musk cods                 } to his sonne and doughter.
  2 picktures                 }
  1 musk cod                  } to Madalina, Mrs. Adames sister.
  1 pickture                  }

And wrot an other letter to her, in answer of hers receaved; and an
other to Toma Dono, the Edo _jurabasso_, in answer of his.

Chubio Dono sent me a pike for a present, with a letter of
recomendacons to his nephew, Gonrok Dono, governor of Langasaque, to
use us kyndly for his sake.

_October 7._--We came this day from Miaco to Fushamy, and gave
presents, viz.:--

  1¼ _tatta._ sad blew clo.           } to our host.
  4 _tatta._ black fustions           }
  2¼ _tatta._ black perpetuano        } to his sonne.
  4 _tatta._ fustion                  }
  1 pec. black satten, cost 5½ _ta._  }
  1 pec. damask, cost 4 _ta._         } to ostis.
  1 pec. taffette, cost 0 : 8 _mas._  }

With 60 _taies_ for our expence lying theare, and a bar plate,
containing 4_ta._ 3_m._ to the servants, all paid per Mr. Wickham.

And we gave for a present to the _macky_ man, viz.:--

  2½ _tatta._ mousculler kersy.
  1 pec. damask, cost 1 _ta._ 6_m._
  1 pec. taffete, cost 0 : 8.

And I thought good to note downe that in the way from Miaco our host
shewed us the preparatives made for the buriall of the ould _dyrie_
(or pope) of Japon, viz.:--In one howse was set a rood or shrine of
marvelose lardgnes, with, to my thinking, 100 pillers gilded over
with gould, with each of them a gilded crowne on the top of them, and
rownd about the howse, against the pillers, a gilded skuchin hanged
up, which, as I learned, represented all the provinces or kingdoms in
Japon, over which he houldeth hym selfe king of kings. Also against
each piller stood a candelstick with a wax taper. But yow must
understand there was an other howse, built highe and 4 square, not far
from this first with the shrine, in the midest wherof was a dipe hole
very fairely plastered, over which a greate vessell of wood was to be
placed, wherin the body of the _dirie_ was to be put, and the valt
under filled with sweete odors and pretious woods, which being set on
fire burne the vessells, corps, howse, and all the rest; with 4 gates
made E., W., N., and S., walled about a pretty distance from the howse,
all being hanged about with white silk which was to be consumed with
the rest.

The greate wooden vessell I saw in a pagod not far from the place
wheare the body was to be burned, which pagod was fownded per the said
_daire_. The vessell in forme was made lyke a lantarne, set out with
pinacles of excellent workmanship, all being gilded over with gould.

The top of the howse where he was to be burned was painted with the
formes of angells, som with instrumentes of musick and others with
garlandes, as it were to crowne hym. And they verely think that, when
the body is consumed, the sole flieth directly for heaven, haveing
liberty to passe out at any of the 4 gates, eather E., W., N., or S.

_October 8._--Being fowle wether, we staid at Fushamy all this day.

_October 9._--We departed towardes Osakay, and gave for presents,
viz.:--

  2{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~} _tatta._ kersey         }
  4 _tatta._ black fustion   } to our host.
  1 pec. damask, to our hostis.
  1 kerimon                  }
  1 gerdell                  } to his sonn, Ric. Cocks.
  1 pere _tabis_ and strings   }
  1 gerdell                    } to his son Wickham.
  1 pere _tabis_               }
  1 gerdell, to his doughter.
  1 pec. taffety, to his sister of other howse.
  1 bar plate, to her husband, for paynes, containing 3 _ta._ 6 _m._
    6 _co._

80 _taies_ for our diet and servantes; 4_ta._ 4_mas._ for gadonge;
4_ta._ 4_mas._ to servantes. Our host and others accompanid as 2
leagues on the way, and brought 4 banketing boxes stuff to feast us;
and he sent his sonne and man to goe thorow with us to Osakay.

_October 10._--Mr. Wickham went to Sackay to buy certen thinges for
Syam voyage, as also to look out whether we could make sales of any
matters.

Also we laid out a present for Shemaz Dono, governor of Osakay, viz.:--

  2 _tatta._ sad blew cloth.
  2 _tatta._ fawne culler.
  2{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE SIXTH~} _tatta._ kersy.
  25 black cony skins.
  25 white lamb skins.
  ½ peec. fustians.

And to his secretary--

  1¼ _tatta._ sad blew.
  ½ peec. fustians.

And Safian Dono sent me a letter with 2 _langanattes_ for a present.

_October 11._--We carid the present to Shemash Dono, governor of
Osakay, with that to his secretary, which was taken in good parte and
many kynd offers of frenshipp to our English nation. This place is
cheefe key of Japon for sending up goodes to sell, which yearly, when
we vizet themperour, we may doe per their permition and no man dare
open their mouthes.

I rec. letters from Firando, dated the 15th ultimo, viz.:--1 from Mr.
Eaton, 1 from Mr. Sayer, 1 from Mr. Nealson, 1 from Mr. Osterwick, 1
from Mr. Totton; with a coppie letter of King of Firandos, written
from hence, per meanes whereof yt seemeth both we and the Hollanders
were per his _bongews_ misused.

_October 12._--This day Mr. Wickham went for Sackay to look out about
busynes, staying till now per meanes fowle wether; and, before he went,
rec. fyve hundred _taies_ of Cuamon Dono, our host, upon acco., in
plate bars. And deliverd one hundred and fyftie _tais_ to Capt. Adames
to lay out about Syam voyage and for Cochinchina in necessaries, wherof
he is to render an accompt, all in bars.

And towardes night Skengro Dono, our hostes sonne of Miaco, with the
_maky_ man, came to this place; as Gifio Dono did the like from Sackay,
sent from the wife of Tozayemon Dono, and brought me a present of frute.

_October 13._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham to buy 2 or 300 _gantos_
of oyle to send for Firando per first, Mr. Totton haveng wrot me there
is non theare. Mr. Wickham retorned answer they would not let us buy
nether armour nor guns at Sackay, it being defended that no strangers
might doe it.

_October 14._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Wickham to tell the governor that
we brought better guns into Japon then we carid out, and that we did
not buy these to weaken their cuntry, nor to arme their enemies, but
were sent to their frendes, and that I cared not much whether we had
them or no. And he retorned me answer, he could not com to speeche of
hym; but had bought 138 _gantos_ of oyle at 16½ _condrins_ per _ganto_,
and shipped it for Firando in 5 barilles at 2 _mas_ per barill, is 1
_tay_.

_October 15._--I wrot Mr. Wickham to meet me at Croby Donos at supper
at Osakay, and to morow to goe together to Sakay. And I paid Maky Dono,
for 20 comb cases, 6 _taies_ bars; and to the traders 6 _tais_, and 4
_mas_ to their servantes.

Capt. Adames envited us to his host Croby Donos to supper, where we had
kynd usadge.

_October 16._--We went to Sackay this day to see whether we could
procure sale of any thing, Capt. Adames and Mr. Wickham accompanying
me, to spend 3 or 4 daies theare, till Cuemon Dono of Osakay have
provided money to cary downe with us, as also to geve content to
Tozayemon Dono in lying som tyme at his howse.

I gave a bar plate to Domingos mother, she coming to vizet me, she
being a very pore woman with 8 children, and her sonne serving me.

_October 17._--I got Capt. Adames to vizet Safian Dono, the governor,
in my name, to thank hym for the present he sent me, as also to shew
the letter to hym, wherin we are alowed to trade for Langasaque, as
well as to Firando, and to offer hym to doe hym any service I may
beloe. He was sick and could not be spoaken withall, but sent word
about buying guns and armors, it was a thing forbidden per themperour
in respect of the Coreans, yet, notwithstanding, our host or others,
by 3 or 4 at a tyme, might provid them, and he would not take knowledg
thereof.

_October 18._--We were envited to Synda Donos to supper, where we had
good cheare, and dansing beares sent hom after us, after they had
showed pastyme theare.

I sent a letter to Firando to Mr. Eaton and rest, with an other to
China Capt., in Japons, how Capt. Adames would sell his junke.

_October 20._--We retorned to Osakay to supper, and paid our host, at
Saky, for our dyet and that of Mr. Wickham, xxx _taies_, with a bar
plate for servantes, containing 3 _ta._ 7 _ma._

And I gave a bar plate to Gifio Donos father, and 2 _tais_ small plate
to dansing bears, and 5 _mas_ to servantes, and a peec. corse damask to
beares, cost 1 _ta._

And our hostis and her daughter had geven them, viz.:--

  2 pec. damask, cost 4 _tais_ per peec.
  1 pec. damask, cost 1 _ta._ 6 _mas._

Also Capt. Adames had 2 peec. taffeties.

This night the gunpolder howse at Osakay was blowne up, and 6 persons
kild out right, and divers others hurt, and the howse burned quite to
the grownd.

_October 21._--Domingos brother in law came and viseted me with a
present of a pewter bason; and I gave hym a peece of taffety, cost me
8 _mas._

_October 22._--Our host of Fushamy came and viseted me and brought a
present of musherons.

_October 23._--We went to supper to Ichizayemon Dono, kynsman to our
host at Miaco, where we were very well entertayned with good cheare
and dansing beares.

_October 25._--We were envited to Echero Donos to supper.

I wrot 3 letters, viz. 1 to Cuemon Dono, our host of Osakay, to com and
bring away the money we stay for; 1 to Magazayemon Dono, host of Miaco,
complementall; 1 to Maky Dono, that I paid 100 _tais_ to his brother
for Mr. Eaton upon acco., desyring hym to bring the rest _maky_ ware
and receve rest of money.

_October 26._--Our host, Cuimon Dono, retorned late yisternight from
Miaco, and now tells me he canot pay all our money, but will send som
1400 _tais_, which wantes, per Capt. Adames. I dowbt he will deceave
us.

I sent to the governor, Shemash Dono, to know whether he would comand
me any serviz, for that I was ready to retorne for Firando. And our
host Cuemon Dono (_alius_ Grubstreet) gave me councell to send 3
_tatta._ fustion to Shemash Donos steward, in respect he was a man
neare unto hym and might stand us in steed hereafter. Soe it was
donne, and taken in good parte.

_October 27._--Our host, Cuimon Dono, of this place of Osakay, went
back to Miaco, having made acco. with Mr. Wickham for all goodes sould
hym at Firando before our coming from thence, as also of all other
sould here since our coming up. So he rest to pay the ballance only
owing belo, being som 1420 _tais_ Japan plate bars, which he promised
to pay to Capt. Adames within this 8 or 10 daies to bring downe after
us. And he gave me a present, before his going, of a _catabra_, 2
bagges sandes or perfums to put amongst clo., 5 salt coddfysh, and 2
bundelles of sea weede.

And Shemash Dono, governour of this citty of Osakay, sent me a present
as followeth:--10 pikes, 6 guns or kalivers, 8 _barsos_ of wyne.

_October 28._--The steward of Shemash Dono, whome had the 3 _tattamis_
of fustion sent hym, sent me 2 piks for a present.

And I had 20 _taies_ plate of Mr. Wickham, whereof 10 was for Tangano,
8 for Mounshine, 1 for Dilligence, 1 to Corye and Marebatan.

And Crobio Donos sonne came to vizet me with a present of banketyng
stuffe, and to envite us to dyner againe, which I thanked hym for, we
being ready to departe towardes Firando. And Shroyemon Donos littell
sonne came from his mother with the like present, enviting us to com
to her howse, which I answerd as before, and sent her a musk cod, and
gave her sonne a peec. taffety, his father being now at Firando, a
cheefe merchant and our good frend.

_October 29._--I wrot out a remembrance to leave with Capt. Adames, he
being to stay heare 18 or 20 daies, to attend the coming of Tozayemon
Dono and Neamon Dono, to accompt with them yf we should misse of them
in the way.

Skengro Dono came from Miaco and brought me a sifron in a chist, cost
4 _ta._ 2 _ma._ 0 _co._

And there was 1½ _tatta._ broad clo. deare culler, and 5 handkerchefes
chint bramport geven in a present to Croby Dono and his wife. And
_tatta._ perpetuano, 3 _tatta_ fustion, 5 handkerchefes chint bramport
to Eche Dono and his wife.

And towardes night Croby Dono came and brought me a banketing box for a
present, and Echere Dono brought 2 _barsos_ wyne and 10 _sequanseques_.

And I gave a coat to Shiske Dono, Echere Donos brother, cost me 3
_tais_ 8 _mas_.

_November 2._--I rec. this mornyng 3 letters from Firando per the
expres sent from Miaco per Capt. Adames:--1 from Mr. Wm. Eaton, dated
16th and kept till 21th ultimo; 1 from Mr. Nealson, of 21th ditto;
1 from Mr. Osterwick, 21th ditto; 4 from Capt. China, Matt[ing]a,
Jno. Japon, and Sinda Dono. And with these letters came these papers
following, viz.:--

  Tozayemon Donos acco. in English  }  wrote out per
  Neamon Donos acco. in English     }  Mr. Osterwick.

  1 paper for broad cloth and elophants teeth   }  all written in
  1 paper for 2000 dearke (_sic_) skins of Syam }  Japons and for
  1 paper for broad cloth                       }  thaccompt of
  1 paper for severall merchandiz               }  Tozayemon Dono
  1 paper for 50 _pico_ sapon                   }  our host of
  1 paper abstrack of accompts                  }  Sakay.

1 paper (or acco.) of Neaman Dono of Edo, in Japons.

1 paper (or bill) of Zezabro Dono, host son of Osakay, for broad cloth
sould hym at Firando.

All which pappers and accompts I left with Capt. Adames, to reccon
with the said partis when they com up, I being ready to departe
towardes Firando.

Also Mr. Ric. Wickham left in the handes of the said Capt. Adames
these papers and acco. written in Japons, viz.:--

1 paper or bill of Tozayemon Dono and Shroyemon Dono, for broad cloth
left with them 10th November, 1617.

1 bill or paper of Tozayemon Dono, for goodes at same tyme.

1 bill or paper for goods left with Yechero Dono of Osakay, le 25th
November, 1616.

The 13 _piculls_ 88 _cattis_ silk sold Tozayemon Dono I rate at 218
_tais pico_, as I sould rest, is 3025 : 8 : 4. So I make ballance of
Tozayemon Donos acco. 6093 : 3 : 3¼, besides the 50 _pico_ Syam wood.

And towardes night Tozayemon Dono came to vizet me, and tould me I
should take noe care for the payment of the money for the goods sould
hym, for that it should be at Firando in tyme to goe in our shiping.

_November 3._--I made a bargen with Croby Dono of Osakay and sould hym
all the silk remeanyng at Firando unsould at my arivall theare, at 218
_tais_ per _pico_, and am now to receve 1000 _taies_ in hand and rest
at delivery of silke, all in good Nagite plate, paying the small
exchange of 3 or 4 _mas_ per 100 _tais_.

And being ready to go towardes Firando, there was geven in the howse
at Osakay for presentes, viz.:--

To our host:

  1¼ _tatta._ brod clo. sad blew.
  3 _tatta._ fustion.

And to his wife:

  1 pec. black satten, cost 4 _tais_.
  1 pec. cushen velvet.

And to his sonne:

  3 _tatta._ naro perpetuano.

And paid for diet and howse charges, 100 _taies_; and geven the
servantes a bar plate, 4 _ta._ 3 _mas_; and to the cheefe maid two
_taies_. And I gave Woman Dono 4 _tais_ 3 _mas_; and Shiske Dono one
_tay_.

The sonns of howse gave me presents of wyne, 2 _barsos_, and 5 hensse.

Soe, late at night, we went downe to Dembo, to goe over the bar next
mornyng, unto which place divers frendes accompanid us with bankets.

And very late Croby Dono came with a thousand _tais_ plate bars and
two writings of the bargen of sale that remeanes at 218 _tais picull_,
this 1000 _tais_ being in part, and rest to be paid at delivery
thereof.

I rec. 20 _tais_ of our hostes wife of Osakay, to employ for Woman
Dono, Mr. Wickhams gerle, and a writing delivered per Mr. Wickham
wherby she is to serve the said woman 4 yeares and then at liberty.

_November 4._--We put over the bar of Osakay an hower before day, and
made this day 35 leagues, day and night, geting 5 leagues past Mouro
this mornyng by son rising.

_November 5._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames to send the _goshon_ of
his junk with the lowest price he will sell the junk for. This letter
I sent ashore at Bingano Tomo 3 howrs before day; and soe departed
forward, we having made this day and night till son rising 19 leagues,
having passed 4 leagues past Bingana Tomo.

_November 6._--We made this day and night following 20 leagues, being
xiij leagues to short of Camina Seake in the mornyng at son rising.

_November 7._--We made this day and night following, till son rising,
21 leagues.

_November 8._--We made this day and night, till son rising, 23 leagues,
and came to an ancor at a place called [Munco].[266] Also late came in
a bark wherin Neamon Dono came, and sent me word he would vizet me, but
did not, but departed away secretly in the night.

_November 9._--I wrot an other letter to Capt. Adames, to send per
first bark we mette, to adviz hym how Neamon Dono did serve me, as
also to same effect as former dated at Munco.

Soe about nowne we set seale, and with much ado got within night to
Shimina Seak, it blowing much wynd N.erly. Soe we made 17 leagues this
day, and ancored theare all night, wynd being W.erly, with rayne.

_November 10._--We staid at Ximinaseak per meanes of fowle weather.

_November 11._--In Ximinaseak I delivered the 20 _tais_ of Woman Dono
to Mr. Wickham.

_November 12._--We departed from Ximinaseak after nowne, and paid our
host for dyet ashore 8 _ta._ 1 _m._ 5 _co._ Soe we put to sea at son
seting, and made till son rising 25 leagues.

_November 13._--We were forced to put into a village in Faccata called
Cattadomary, 27 leagues to short of Firando.

I wrot a letter from hence to Capt. Adames, to buy 6 or 8 _pico_
gunpolder.

_November 14._--We bought two calves this day, cost 1 _ta._ 5 _ma._ 0
_c._ both.

_November 15._--We departed from Cattado Mary this mornyng, other barks
going out, and soe, allthough it were calme, rowed it up, and with much
ado the next mornyng got to Languay, wind being so contrary, having
made, night and day, 14 leagues. We gave our host at Cattado Mary 3
_ta._ 5 _m._ 0 _co._ for his howse, and a peece of backar baroche[267]
to his children to make them 2 coates.

_November 16._--We put into Languay, where we staid all this day and
night following by means of contrary wyndes.

_November 17._--We departed from Languay, and about nowne came to
Firando, haveing made 13 leagues; but gave a bar plate to our host.

At our arivall the Hollander shipps shot affe 14 or 15 pec. of
ordinance, and our ship the _Adviz_ 7 peeces. And sowne after the Duch
generall sent me 2 bottells Spanish wyne, and Albartus came to vizet
me with many complementos. And most of the gentellmen of Firando ether
sent or came to vizet me.

_November 18._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames and an other to his
host, Croby Dono, advising howe we had sould all our silke, wood, and
skins, as also all our broad cloth, of which I willed hym to adviz his
said host, because he should send downe no more money trusting on the
salle of silk.

Also I wrot 2 letters to Tozeyemon Dono and Cuemon Dono, desyring them
to dispach Capt. Adames away, otherwais the money will not com in tyme
to send in the shipp nor junk. Also I wrot Capt. Adams in a ticket put
into my letter that the China Capt. hath spoaken to som frendes to buy
his junk, but non will geve above 1000 _taies_ for her with pasport and
all other matters.

The King of Firando sent to envite me and the rest of thenglish
merchants to dyner to morrow.

_November 19._--I gave Mr. Eaton, Mr. Sayer, Mr. Nealson, and Mr.
Osterwick, each of them a _keremon_ of them themperour gave me, with 2
others same to Capt. China and his brother. Also I gave a _langenack_
to Mr. Totton, a pike to Mr. Wedmore, and a banketing box to Mr.
Coleson; with a gerdell and a peare _tabis_ and stringes to women of
Mr. Eaton, Mr. Nealson, and Sayer, Mr. Osterwick, Capt. Chinas wife,
and Susanna; and a coate and peare _tabis_ and stringes to China Capt.
doughter; and like to Wm. Eaton; withot her matters to dyvers other
servantes and frendes; and to Matinga, 3 coates, 2 peare _tabis_ and
stringes, 2 gerdelles, etc.

We went to dyner to the king, where we were well feasted, he esteeming
our nation far before the Hollanders, as he tould us.

_November 20._--I wrot 2 letters to Langasaque, 1 to Jorg Durois, and
other to Alvaro Munos, with 2 other letters in Japons to Gonrok Dono
and Capt. Whaw, and sent a _keremon_ to China Capt. Whaw for a present.
These letters went per Mr. Eaton, whoe I sent to Langasaque to rec. the
money of Gonrok Dono for the lead sould themperour.

Also I sent Gonrok Dono 2 letters, one from Safian Dono, and thother
from Chubio Dono, his uncles, wherin they wrot hym in our behalfe to
use us well in all occations.

And we went to the King of Firando with a present as hereafter
followeth, viz.:--

  4 _tatta._ sad blew.
  4 _tatta._ strawculler.
  2 _tatt._ fyne black.
  1 peec. Denshier kersy.
  2 peec. brod perpetuano.
  1 peec. narro perpetuano.
  5 peec. fustians.
  50 blak cuny skins.
  50 white lamb skins.
  50 fitchat skins.
  5 _picull_ of lead.
  10 _picull_ of sapon.

Mr. Osterwick paid 2300 _tais_ plate bars to Andrea Dittis, China
Capt., for rest of acco. money taken up at interest of his brother and
other Chinas, and gave me back my two bills for 3000 _taies_ lent us at
intrest of 20 per cnto. the yeare past; and in this acco. they alowed
the money and intrest wanting in acco. at Bantam, being, as Mr. Balle
writeth, with exchang, 1800 _ts._

The Hollandes junk for Syam went out, and I sent Sr. Mathias, the
capten, a barill _morofack_ and a pork.

_November 21._--I wrot a breefe letter to Syam, directed to Mr. Jno.
Johnson and Mr. Ric. Pittes, and sent per Sr. Mathias in the Hollandes
junk, advising them that our junk would be ready shortly to goe after
her, Mr. Eaton being capt. in her, and Mr. Burges pilott.

_November 22._--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton for Langasaque, and sent
it per Sr. Harry Starkasse.

I rec. a letter from Langasaque from Capt. Whow, with a peec. wroght
satten for a toaken, in which letter he wrot me how all the skins he
bought at 23½ _tais_ per 100 skins, whiche he sould to Japons at 18
_tais_ after at tyme, are now all retorned back from Miaco upon his
hands, as not beinge merchandable, saying no man will geve 8 _taies_
per 100 skins for them, they are soe motheaten, as also ther wanted 135
skins in tale.

Also Giquan, the China, and an other China of Langasaque came to vizet
me, and brought me in a present of 2 jars conservs, 2 _barsos_ wyne, a
baskit of oringes, and another of peares.

And the China Capt. gave me a fardell or serne[268] of mase, waying
neare a quintall,[269] it being sent hym from Bantam, and he not
knowing what it is good for.

_November 23._--The China Capt. sent me a fatt hogg and 3 marchpanes
for a present, haveing many Chinas com from Langasaque to vizet hym in
respect of the berth of his yong doughter, the Chinas being above 50
persons; and each one hath brought a present, most of plate, and some
of eatable stuffe.

_November 24._--Many men com to enquire after price silke; soe it is
risen to above 250 _tais pico_, and is thought will com to above 300
_tais_ in respect the Hollanders have shipt away most parte of theirs
they took per reprisall, and the Portingalls stand upon the price of
theirs, as the Chinas doe the like. So now it apereth what it is to
sell away per force, as we doe to make retorne per these shipps.

Gonrok Dono sent me a letter with 5 coates for a present, with many
wordes of complemento, being ready to departe towardes Miaco.

And Mr. Wickham went to Langasaque, and ould Mr. Burges with hym.

_November 25._--I rec. severall letters from Capt. Adames, dated in
Osakay, from the 10th to the 16th currant, 5 letters in all, 4 of them
by his man Genkese, and the 5th by Croby Donos kynsman, with a present
of a silk coate, a _cattan_, and 2 _barsos_ wyne; and 2 _barsos_ wyne
and a hen from Taccamon Dono.

Also Capt. Adames wrot me that Safian Dono died at Sakay the 15th day
of this month; as also that our host Grubstreet would pay no money, but
drove hym affe with delaies, pleaing least in sight, etc. So I wrot hym
a letter (I meane to Capt. Adames) to bring hym before the justice, and
soe to make an end.

Genquese brought 2000 _tais_ in 2 chistes from Capt. Adames.

_November 26._--I went and vizeted Semi Dono with a present of 1¼
_tatta._ sad blew clo., and I peece fustion. He took it in good parte
with many kynd protestations. This is a suttell man, and one that
ruleth more then the king. The Hollanders gave hym a present worth
about 200 _taies_.

I also made sale to China Capt. of Capt. Adames junk with the _goshon_,
for 1200 _taies_. But Yasimon Dono stood against it, thinking others
would geve more. So I offerd yt to hym at same price, which he refused.

I sent a letter to Capt. Adames, junk sould for 1200 _tais_.

_November 27._--I sent and envited the Hollands generall with the rest
of the principall men to dyner on Sonday next.

I wrot a letter to Mr. Wikham and Eaton to Langasaque, how I thought
the swart[270] was run away with our table lynen he had to wash,
wishing them to look out theare for hym.

The Hollandes generall sent me a runlet of Canare wyne, exskewsing
hym selfe to com to dyner on Sonday, for that he fownd hym selfe ill
at ease and tooke phisick. But I doe rather esteem he taks state upon
hym. Yet, be it ether one occation or other, I sent hym word he should
be wellcom yf he pleased to com, and that I made no dowbt, although
he were ill at ease now, yt might please God he might be well againe
before Sonday, etc.

Mr. Eaton and Mr. Totton retorned from Langasaque to Firando this
night. And the China Capt. Whawe lent them his _foy fone_. But som of
the rowers stole a small silver cup of the Companies out of Mr. Tottons
chist in carrying it abord.

Mr. Eaton tells me that a Spaniard called Miguell de Salines would have
taken away our caffro Antony, set free per King of Firando, geving out
great wordes that he would spend 4000 _taies_ but he would have hym.
But Mr. Eaton tould hym his wordes would not prevaile, and therefore
wished hym to com to me and aske hym, otherwais he had nothing to say
to hym.

I, upon good consyderation, let the China Capt. and his brother, Capt.
Whow, have our 2 lesser bras fowlers with their 4 chambers.

_November 28._--I delivered Capt. Adames _goshon_ to Skydayen Dono,
whoe is partner in buying his junk, in presence of the China Capt.,
when it was delivered. And we sould all the rest of our skins of Syam
to Croby Donos kynsman, for 20 _taies_ for 100 skins.

This mornyng an ould man came from Jor. Durois to trym our frute trees.

_November 29._--I wrot two letters to Langasaque, one to Mr. Wickham
and an other to Capt. Whaw, and sent them per China Capt. And wrot Mr.
Wickham to bring 3 or 4000 _tais_ refined plate from China Capt. for so
much delivered hym heare to chang.

_November 30._--I rec. a letter from Mr. Wickham of report popish
miracles, how a mans arme was drid up for offring to burne a fryres
cope or vestment, his arme standing stiff out, he not being able to
pul it back nor bend it. Thus doe these popish pristes envent lies to
deceave the pore symple people.

The fryre that was taken at mas was called Padre Appolenarius, and
was taken in Arima; but the Christians rose up in armes against the
Emperours offecers, and tooke hym per force. So what will com of it is
uncerten. Yt was this mans cope or vestment which he left behind hym
which wrought this miracle, as the papists report; but yow may beleeve
it yf yow please.

The Hollanders came all to dyner, except the generall and Mr.
Barkhoult, they being sick of a fever, as the others report.

The master of the _Galleas_ and the secretary sent me a _barica_ of
Spanish wyne.

_December 1._--I envited all the Chinas to dyner, which came to the
ceremonies of China Capt. child, in respect of the overplus left of
enviting the Hollanders. Soe it cost not much, they being above 20
persons.

Capt. Speck came hym selfe to desyre me to let hym have one peece of
canvas (or poledavis) for a sample to trye to make other by.

_December 2._--The China Capt. departed towardes Langasaque with all
the other Chinas with hym which came to vizet hym for the berth of his
child.

Jno. Derckson Lamb, the Hollandes generall, came to vizet me at
English howse, exskewsing hym selfe he came not to dyner the other
day, in respect he was sick and newly let blood, soe that his
chirurgion councelled hym not to goe; otherwais no other occation
should have staid hym. So I made hym colation in the best sort I
could.

Mr. Osterwick rec. 931 _ta._ 5 _m._ 0 _co._ of Croby Donos kynsman,
for 4050 deare skins at 23 _taies_ per 100 skins, in bars of Nagita.
At which tyme I deliverd back the chist of 1000 _tais_ plate bars rec.
at Dembo, neare Osakay, of Croby Dono upon acco. of goods sould upon
conditions, viz. silke, yf it were not sould before. But being sould
before my arivall at Firando, I retorned the money back.

_December 3._--The Hollandes generall went abord the _Gallias_, a
shipp of 400 tons, which they are now sending out to attend the Amacan
shipp, whoe, as it is said, is ready to departe from Langasaque. Soe
the generall took leave (or bad the capt. farewell), and shot affe much
ordinance out of all their shipps, that all Firando shook with it, and
at same tyme ordained one Mr. Barkhout captaine of the _Gallias_ and
the _Son_, whoe are apointed to som exploit; and Jno. Dreckson Lamb to
goe in the _Flushing_ direct for Molucas.

The generall, Jno. Derickson Lamb, sent me a peece of wrought velvet,
a peece of silke grogren, and a peece of black rich taffety, for a
present, with many complementall and frendly speeches.

The _Gallias_ went out to Cochy roade, because she might be ready to
set seale when the Macan shipp departed from Langasaque. Ther was much
ordinance shot affe at Duch howse and out of ther shipps, and 5 pec.
out of the _Adviz_.

_December 4._--I rec. a letter from Capt. Adames, dated in Osakay le
21th of November, advising of an other sent per his man in a bark of
Sakay with 1300 _tais_ Nagita plate in bars; and that Grubstreet will
pay noe plate, but put hym affe with wordes. But the bark of Sackay is
not yet com, wherin the plate cometh.

Sofy, the rich _boz_ of Miaco, came to vizet me, and brought me a
present of 10 Japon trenchers and a baskit of wallnuttes, with many
complementall wordes, and tould me he would com to morrow to look of
such merchandiz as we had, and buy them, yf we would sell at resonable
price.

_December 5._--The bark of Sackay, wherin Capt. Adames sent the 1300
_tais_, arived at Firando this day, sent per his man Gerosaque, rec.
of Tozayemon Dono, as also the 2000 _tais_ before was rec. of hym.

_December 6._--I sent Jno. Derickson Lamb, the Duch generall, a
present, viz.:--

  1 _makey_ spout pot and eauer of largest sort.
  1 standing cup and cover, _maky_.
  1 tankard _maky_ work.
  4 beakers _maky_ work.            1   8   0

The Hollandes generall sent me two bottells of Spanish wyne and a
Hollandes cheese.

And I rec. 2 letters from Mr. Wickham, dated in Langasaque, le 3th and
4th currant, sent per Mr. Burges, wherin he writes me he stayeth only
for 3 or 4000 _tais_ the Capt. China promiseth to send me in refyned
plate within 2 or 3 daies.

_December 7._--This night past Shosque Dono, the King of Firandos
secretary, was made to cut his belly, as the secretary of Taccamon Dono
was caused to doe the lyke few daies past. The reason was for that they
bought and sould abord the Hollandes shipps, and forbad all others to
doe the lyke. The king demanded 800 _tais_ from Shosque Dono, or else
to cut his belly, whoe, not having it to pay, did it.

He also demandeth 300 _tais_ of Goresano, our quandom knave
_jurebasso_, or else to get hym out of the cuntrey with on sute of
aparell on his back, and leave howse, wife, and children, and all the
rest he hath, behind hym.

Also the lyke demand, or such lyke, is made to Skyamon Dono, a
stranger, and favoret of the kynges heretofore.

The Hollandes generall sent me a present of 2 bottells Spanish wyne and
a Hollandes cheese. And the domene cam to me with 3 soldiers with hym
to entreate me to speake to the said generall, Jno. Derickson Lamb, to
save 3 souldiers that were condemned to the gallies, of the which I had
broken the matter to hym before. And it seemeth now they are desiros to
sett them at liberty upon my second motion, as I understand from the
fiscall.

_December 8._--The Hollanders were envited to dyner to the howse of
Semi Dono, whither they went in pomp, the generall leading in cuerpo,
with a trunchon in his hand and a greate cheane of gould about his
neck, and all the cheefe in rank after hym, 2 in two, to the number of
above 20 persons.

_December 9._--The rendador (or mynt man) of themperour came from
Langasaque to Firando to melt plate for the Hollanders, and came to
vizet me and brought me a present of a silke _catabra_, offring to
refyne our plate in any forme or goodnes as we desired, and tould me
his sonne was strucken blynd, desiring to have our chirurgions to look
on hym and to see whether they could doe hym any good or no.

I went to vizet the Hollandes generall, whoe at my request set at
liberty 4 souldiers formerly condemned to the gallies.

_December 10._--The fiscall and secretary of the Hollanders came to
thenglish howse and brought the prisoners with irons at their legges,
and tould them for my sake they were sett at liberty, and soe caused a
smith to knock affe their shakles and let them loose, they upon their
knees geveing me thanks, promising to doe soe well hereafter that they
hoped my time emploid for ther liberty should not be ill spent, etc.

_December 11._--In respect Capt. Whaw lent his _foy fone_ and people to
bring back Mr. Wickham, we gave a barill wyne, a bag rise, and a _tay_
of plate to company, and 1 _tay_ plate to Capt. Whaws man.

The sargantes, corperalls, and other Duch officers came to thenglish
howse, with Georg ----[271] an English man, to thank me for being the
meanes to get the 3 souldiers pardoned. Yt seemes Capt. Speck was much
against it, and urged the generall to tell hym he was thoccation of
that had happened in leaving open the windoes, otherwise no such matter
had byn attempted; and, yf he well bethought hym selfe, these men had
spent their blood in getting those goodes, and lost all they had when
thadmerall ship was sunk, so that a more charetable mynd were better;
"and yet (said he) I am no man that will mentayne theft. And had it byn
any of your merchandiz sent out of Holland I should esteem the falt
more greater."

_December 12._--Capt. Barkhout, Mr. Albartus, and an other merchant
came from the Hollandes generall to envite us to dyner on Sonday next.

We delivered the 10 _pico_ sapon to the _Tono_ of Firando, geven hym in
present.

_December 13._--The rendadors made ready the place to refyne our plate,
and Croby Donos partner delivered me one thousand _tais_ in ould plate
bars, chosen per rendador, it being better to melt then thother, and
goeth upon accompt of sappon, he which bought it haveing promised the
one halfe.

The Hollandes generall sent me a Hollandes cheese per Albartus, puting
me and rest in mynd to com to morow to dyner. Yt seemeth they had not
greatly cared yf we had not promised to com to dyner, in respect the
world might have esteemed they respected us not yf they had not don it,
which made me to goe, not for a dyner, etc.

_December 14._--The thunderbout light upon the mastes of the 2
Hollandes shipps, the _Flushing_ and _Sonne_, the night past, and did
them som hurt, but not much.

We dyned at Hollandes howse, where we were kyndly entertayned, etc.

_December 15._--The kyng dyned at Hollandes howse this day, where there
was healths drunk and much ordinance shot affe, both at the howse and
abord the shipps.

We dyned abord our junk, she being now ready to set seale for Syam.
God send her a prosperous voyage. We had 3 peeces at our going abord,
with other healths, shot affe for Kynges Mt. of England, with 7 at our
departure, and 5 out of _Defence_.

_December 16._--I sent yisternight to thank the Duch generall for our
kynd entertaynment the day before. And he retorned answer, he was
very glad yf it were to our content, and was ready to doe ether me
or any other of our English nation any service or pleasure he could;
withall sent me word that the loving kyndnes he had receved from me
in espetiall could never be forgotten whiles he lived, knowing well
it came from a good hart, wishing the English else where were of my
opinion and caradg, and then he durst presume there would be no ill
will betwixt the English and Hollanders.

The China Capt., Andrea Dittis, retorned this mornyng from Langasaque,
and brought me a present of a box sett with glasse beades, or such
lyke, as I think, as also a letter from his brother, Capt. Whaw, to
send hym 1000 _tais_ in plate of bars to be emploid about procuring
trade into China, they allwaies being answerable for it, whether it
take effect or no. Also he desired me to send hym a Japon _keremon_ of
the largest of them themperour gave me, to be emploid that way, for
which he would not forget to be answerable.

Our junk being ready to goe out, the Japon offecers cam and demanded
to have 14 passingers to goe for Syam, although I had it under their
handes to the contrary that they should carry non. Soe in thend I
offred to geve 7 of them 5 _tais_ per man, and the boteswaine 30
_tais_, to be emploid in wood, and deliver them at their retorne to
Japon, but know not whether they will be content therewith or no. God
blesse me out of the handes of these people.

An ambassador of Figen[272] sent to the King of Firando came to see
thenglish howse this day, to whome I gave the best entertaynment I
could.

Mr. Totton fell into a strang humor, misusing Mr. Nealson in vild
terms, telling me he was used like a slave in the English howse, and
therfore would com in it no more. This he did being in drink, as it
seemed.

_December 17._--I gave 2 of my best _keremons_, geven me per Emperour,
to China Capt. and his brother, to be sent into China about procuring
trade, for a present to greate men.

I sent Jno. _jurebasso_ to Oyen Dono to speake to the kyng to helpe
with money to send in this shipp for Bantam, as also to cause the 22
bagges rise to be delivered me, paid for twise in acco.; whoe retorned
me answer he would solicet the kyng in this matter.

Also I sent hym to Semidone to put hym in mind of 100 _tais_ Goresano
oweth upon acco., that he would force hym to pay it. He sent me answer
he was going out of towne, but, at his retorne within 2 or 3 daies,
would tak matter in hand.

_December 18_ (_Seitach_, 1th day Japon moon).--The fownders to melt
plate (or mynt men) came to work this mornynge. I delivered the
thowsand _tais_ to Mr. Osterwick, which I rec. of Croby Donos partner
the other day, being plat bars, to fownd (or mynt) with the rest.

The China Capt. gave me 2 peces red damask, sent from his brother,
Capt. Whow, as he said.

The Hollandes shipp called the _Flushing_ went out to Cochy this day,
and I sent our _foy fone_ to helpe to toe her out. She shot affe 9
peeces ordinance at going out; and 7 peces (or chambers) were shott
affe at Hollandes howse, 5 peces out of the _Son_, with 5 out of our
shipp _Adviz_, and 3 out of our junk.

We were constrayned, in respect of the necessety of tyme, to agree
to lend the mareners of our junk 150 _tais_ Japon plate till their
retorne, with condition that yf they went quietly on the voyag, and so
retorned to Japon with the good report of Mr. Eaton, the capt., and
Andrea, the Japon botswain (or counter master, as they call hym), that
then they ware to pay back but the 150 _tais_; yf not, then to pay 300
_tais_. As also there was 7 of them had 5 _tais_ a man paid them, is 35
_tais_.

A letter to Capt. Whaw, with the 2 Japon _keremons_, 30 _amars_ or
bundelles rottans; and that the 1,000 _tas._ was ready to lend to
procure trade into China; as also I had rec. the _foy fone_ or boate he
sent me in present, etc.

_December 19._--I rec. 2 letters from Capt. Adames, on dated in Osakay,
30th ultimo, and thother in Ximina Seak, 14th present, how he bringeth
1,200 _tais_ from Tozayemon Dono, and 500 _tais_ from Grubstreet, and
can get no more.

Also I rec. a letter from Omperas father, with a littell _barso_ wyne
called _bringe_, and 200 orenges.

_December 20._--A cavelero came to vizet me, and brought me 2 _barsos_
wyne and fishes for a present. Matingas father was his servant in tyme
past.

The night past, the Hollanders tooke 4 theeves of their owne people,
2 soldiers and 2 caffros, whoe had made a falce key and stolne goodes
out of the howse. Som thought to have fled, but were taken, the King
of Firando haveing geven charge that no boate should passe out of the
iland.

_December 21._--I receved a letter from Capt. Adames from Langway, 12
leagues from Firando, how he la there windbound. And the Hollanders
shot affe 7 peces ordinance out of the _Son_ about midnight, and 9
chambers out of howse, in honor of their New Years Day to morrow.

_December 22._--The Hollandes generall sent his nois of trompets[273]
to geve me a salve this mornyng before day, unto whome I gave a bar
plate containing 3_ta._ 0_m._ 6_co._

About nowne, Capt. Adames arived at Firando, and came overland from
Languay, the sea being greate and the wynd skant.

Late towardes night, the Hollandes generall, with Capt. Speck and all
the cheefe, came to English howse to bid me fare well, the generall
meanyng to departe towardes the Molucas to morrow, as they geve it
out. The generall drunk a health on his knees to the Kinges Matie. of
England, and cauced 7 peces ordinance to be shot out of the _Son_. And
after, we drunk the lyke to the Grave Mouris, and shot 7 more out of
the _Advize_, and 5 for a health to the generall.

_December 23._--The Hollandes generall, Jno. Derikson Lamb, went abord
his shipp to Cochy to put to sea, and had 11 chambers shot affe at
Hollandes howse, with 5 peeces ordinance out of the _Son_. And we shot
7 out of the _Advize_, and they answered with 3 after out of _Son_. I,
not being well at ease, sent Mr. Wickham, accompanid with Capt. Adames
and rest Englishmen, to Cochy to bid the generall fare well, and sent
hym 2 barilles _morofack_, a hogge, 2 sucking pigges, and 20 loves
bread. And, as they were within saker shot of the Duch admerall, she
shot affe 5 peces ordinance for a farewell to the Japon _bongews_ who
accompanid them, one of which peeces, being a bras demycolverin (being
duble charged by mischance), brake and staved 5 or 6 cabbins and as
many chistes, and did much shake the generalls cabbin, puting hym in
danger of his lyfe, and wounded and meamed 7 or 8 men, but non slaine,
and was in greate danger to have fyred all the gunpolder, being 200
barilles; which cauced the fiskall, Mr. Albartus, and the secretary to
leape overbord into the sea. Two of them, not being abell to swym, had
lyke to have byn drowned, and the therd fell into a Japon boate, and
shaken her bottom out, and had lyke to have broken his legges. Yet in
the end all turned into a laughter and mocking of those 3 men. And soe
gave thenglish kynd entertaynment, with 5 peces out of admerall, and 3
out of _Gallias_ at their departure.

And at Mr. Wickhams retorne, he had notis that the Japon whome I saved
the life of the other day, and gave hym to hym for his servant, did
yisternight steale a silver cup out of the Hollandes howse, and sould
it in the towne for 3_ta._ 3_mas_. The cup I retorned hom to Capt.
Speck, with advize I recoverd it from the theefe which stole it.

_December 24._--Our Japon slave had punishment this day, all the
servantes in the howse, with others apointed, geveing hym 10 lashes
with a duble rope over the naked body and buttockes, till all the skin
was beaten affe, and after washed hym in bryne. I wish it may be a
warning to the foole, for so I estem hym.

Divers passingers which ment to have gon in our junk against my
will (for Syam) went and complayned to Taccamon Dono to have passag
perforce, and to that entent he sent me word. But I retorned answer I
had the Emperours _goshon_ to entertayne or send whome I listed, in
paying them, and, yf he had any other authorety to send passingers
against my will, let hym shew it, otherwaies non should goe. Unto which
he retorned me answer, he would not meddell in the matter, but bad me
doe as I pleased.

_December 25._--I envited all the shipp and junk offecers to dyner this
day, it being Christmas Day. The China Capt. sent me 10 boxes marmalad,
a baskit of pearse, and a fat China capon; and sent a boate for a kyd,
but not retorned. The _Flushing_ went out, but, wynd proving contrary,
retorned back to Cochy roade.

_December 26._--I wrot a letter to Salvador Daravis, in answer of his
rec., with the ring of rubis and 2 gars salt mangas. Also I send a
scritorio for hym.

The Hollandes generall sent me a _barica_ of Spanish wyne, and after
dyner I went abord the Hollandes generall to Cochy roade, and carid hym
a _langanate_, which Safian Dono gave me for a present. At our coming
abord (Mr. Sayer, Mr. Osterwick, and Mr. Totton accompanyinge me), he
gave us 5 peces of ordinance, and, at our departure, 5 more, and 3 out
of the _Gallias_, viz. admerall, taking my visetation in very kynd part.

I gave the China Capt. a _kerymon_ of silk for his doughter to sleepe
in; and after, he sent me a peece black satten and a peece blew damaske.

Capt. Adames bark arived this day late from Languay, having taken
greate pains to row it up.

At my retorne from abord Duch shipp, word was brought me that Taccamon
Dono said our junk should not goe out for Syam except I sufferd each
offecer to carry 2 passingers, according to the custom of the cuntrey.
Also others said that our junk was falne into an extreame leake. And
the therd news was that Langasaque was set on fyre. For the two first,
of the wordes of Taccamon Dono and junkes leake, I think it rather the
knavery of the unruly mareners, whoe wish it might be soe, then
otherwaies.

_December 27._--I sent abord junk to look out about leake; and it is
nothing but puting abord ballast hath brought her deeper, and som 6
inches water encreased in 16 howres.

I rec. a letter from Jor. Durois, dated in Langasaque, 2th January,
new stile, with 8 oreng trees, cost all 6 _taies_.

I rec. of Capt. Adames in ready money. viz.:--

  1200 _taies_ from Tozayemon Dono of Sakay.
  0500 _taies_ from Cuemon Dono or Grubstreet of Osakay.
  0080 _taies_ from Shroamon Dono of Osakay.

All the which soms of 1780 _taies_ I delivered at receapte to Mr. Jno.
Osterwick.

And I rec. per Capt. Adames these letters following:--

  1 from Tozayemon Dono of Sakay.
  1 from Shroamon Dono of Osakay.
  1 from Cuemon Dono, host of Osakay.
  1 from Magazemon Dono, host of Miaco.
  1 from Neamon Dono of Edo.
  1 from Cynemon Dono of Osakay, unknowne.
  1 from Tangano, etc.

This day the trew news came of the burnyng of above 200 howses at
Langasaque, wherof many did belonge to pore Chinas. One amongst the
rest, adventuring over rashly to have saved som money, was smothered
and burned, never retorning out. And Andrea Dittis and his brother,
Capt. Whaw, had 3 howses burned, with 1 gedong, much goodes being in
it, as Andrea tould me.

_December 28._--I sent a barill _skar_ beare to the Hollandes fiskall;
but the ship was gon out before it came, and the bearer delivered it
to Capt. Speck.

We gave 1 _pico_ bitell nuttes to the China Capt., for no man will buy
them.

Towardes night the offecers junk came, and tould me Taccamon Dono had
sent to warne their hostes not to suffer them to carry out our junk,
nor goe abord, except they might carry passingers with them.

_December 29._--I delivered my letters for Syam to Mr. Eaton, viz.:--

  2 to Mr. Jno. Johnson and Ric. Pittes.
  1 to Mr. Georg. Savidg for Camboia.
  1 to Mr. Jno. Ferrers for Champa.
  2 coppies letters rec. from Mr. Savadg and Jno. Ferrers from dit.
    plac.
  1 letter to Salvador Daravis.

With the memoriall or comition delivered to Mr. Eaton.

All which letters and coppies are to be seene per coppies.

As also the cargezon goodes sent in _Sea Adventure_, enclozed to Mr.
Johnson, etc., viz.:--

                                               _ta. m. co._
  In plate Soma refyned, with exchange         1218   0   0
  In bars plat refynd lyk tyn, with exchange   1156   1   5
  In plate bars of Japon _Nagites_             1000   0   0

  Som totall plate amontes unto                3374   1   5
  And in merchandiz as per perticulers         0438   9   2¾

  Som totall all cargazon amontes              3813   0   7¾
  But I make it                                3813   0   9½

I send tokens, viz.:--

  1 scritorio to Mr. Johnson, cost me        03_ta._ 0_m._ 0_co._

  1 to Mr. Pittes, cost                      01_ta._ 8_m._ 0_co._

1 bill to Salvador, money geven his sonne, with 1 skritorio.

The _maky_ man arived here yisternight, and brought me 3 letters, 1
from Tozayemon Dono, and the other from Magazemon Dono.

_December 30._--I wrot 2 letters to the English and Japon umpra, and
sent them 2 present, viz.:--

  2 fowling peces, cost                     8   8   9
  1 pec. spoted satten, cost                8   0   0
  1 pec. damask, blak and green             6   0   0

I forgot to note downe how I went to vizet the _tono_ yisternight,
and carid hym a jar conservs, and Capt. Adames carid hym a _barso_
wyne and 2 fyshes. I tould hym our junk was ready to departe towardes
Syam, offring hym to doe hym any service in that place we could, which
he took in good parte, promesing all frenshipp he could towardes our
nation, and with all thanking me for the frenshipp I showed hym at his
being at Miaco, and telling me I should have barkes ready to toe out
our junk at my pleasure, etc.

Our junk being ready to goe out, Taccamon Dono sent me word that,
except I would alow of 10 passingers to goe in her, we should have no
boates to toe her out, nether would he suffer our offecers to goe in
the junk. So the tyde not tarryng for the kyng (as the proverb is), I
hired 2 boates by meanes of Capt. Adames, and two I set out my selfe,
and the Hollanders sent their _foy fone_, and the China Capt. an other
bark, and the _Adviz_ sent her boate; with which we got out our junk,
contrary to their expectation, and carid her into Cochy roade. Yet this
Taccamon Dono cauced the Japans hostes to our offecers to stay them.
Wherupon I was forced to goe to the king to complaine, but could not
com to speech of hym. So the junk was forced to stay all this day, and
loose a fayre wynde. And within night this Taccamon Dono sent 3 or 4
men (as coming from the kyng) to have passadg for 3 men, and got the
China Capt. to com to speake for them; but I denid them all.

Oyen Dono sent me word the king had reproved Taccamon Dono and bad hym
not meddell in our busynes.

Mr. Eaton had one hundred _taies_ alowed hym on his wagis, and I paid
hym my selfe.

_December 31._--This day Taccamon Dono sent againe to the hostes howses
of our junk offecers, charging them not to let the offecers departe
till I agreed to let the passingers passe in our junk. So I was forced
againe to get Capt. Adames to goe to the kyng, with our _jurebasso_
in his company, to complaine of the wrong Taccamon Dono doth us, our
junk being now ready to goe out. So the kyng gave order forthwith to
the hostes to let them goe. And sowne after Taccamon Dono sent to me
to exskeuse hym selfe, saying he was ill enformed of my matter by the
passingers, and therefore craved pardon. This Taccamon Dono is a prowd,
humerose, dreamyng fello.

After dyner, Mr. Eaton went abord the junk to Cochy, and carid all the
marreners with hym; but the wether did groe so boysterous, and blew
soe hard a gale wynd, that they were in danger to have perished. And,
as report goeth, ther is above 30 barkes cast away, laden with rise
and other merchandiz, coming from Langasaque, Fingo, Xaxma, and those
partes, and all or most parte of people drowned.


                            END OF VOL. I.


              T. RICHARDS, 37, GREAT QUEEN STREET, W.C.




                              FOOTNOTES:


[1] Part i, pp. 366, _sqq._

[2] This is shown in a volume among the Records of the India Office,
entitled "_Supplement to China Materials_, Book I. Japan" (press-mark:
T. (b), vol. i), which contains a compilation, made in 1824, of all the
material which could be gathered from the Company's papers relative
to the English trade with Japan from 1600 to 1689. I have found this
book most useful; and some of the information which it gives cannot
be obtained elsewhere, owing to the loss of original papers. Rundall,
also, in his _Memorials of the Empire of Japon_ (Hakluyt Society),
1850, has printed some extracts from the diary.

[3] See his letters in Rundall's _Memorials_. In the course of this
Preface I have not thought it necessary to retain in quotations the
old spelling of originals.

[4] Cocks calls him "the pope of Japon", i. 311.

[5] See below, i. 201, ii. 270.

[6] Cocks notices the rumour of his death by poison, ii. 271.

[7] He rejoiced in the name of Quaeckernaeck.

[8] See _Purchas his Pilgrimes_, i. 369. Foyne rather astonished Saris
by asking for a piece of poldavis, or canvas, to make his shirt; and
he seems to have appreciated English beef and pork, "sod with onions
and turnips" (_ibid._, i. 369, 400). It was perhaps indulgence in such
luxuries that gained him the nick-name of "Lucullus", which occurs in
one of Wickham's letters.

[9] This is more probably a title than a name, as another Oyen Dono
appears as secretary to the shogun.

[10] Called also Spex, or Specx, by other writers.

[11] An account of the journey to court, attributed to Speck,
is printed in the _Voiage au Japon_, included in Constantin de
Renneville'a _Recueil des Voyages_, Rouen, 1725, tom. 7. See also
Rundall's _Memorials_.

[12] _Purchas_, i, 396.

[13] The modern Shidzuoka.

[14] The expenses of this journey amounted to 1713 _taels_ 4 _mas_, or
about £428.

[15] _Purchas_, i. 379.

[16] He thus spells his name in his early letters. At a later period he
wrote "Cock" with a flourish, which would be equivalent to "Cockes".
His contemporaries sometimes call him Cock, but more generally Cocks,
Cox, or Coxe.

[17] _Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, East Indies, China,
and Japan_, 1513-1616, nos. 256, 281.

[18] _Ibid._, no. 98.

[19] _Calendar_, 1617-1621, nos. 315, 792.

[20] Incorrectly named Edward Sares in Saris's narrative (_Purchas_,
i. 379).

[21] Rundall's _Memorials_, p. 67.

[22] His actual term of service was from 24th November, 1613, to 24th
December, 1616. In the interval between the latter date and his death
he was engaged, sometimes in trading on his own account, sometimes as
agent or interpreter to the English or Dutch.

[23] _Purchas_, i. 369.

[24] _Purchas_, i. 377.

[25] He is said to have died from the effects of a wound received at
the storming of Ozaka. See Titsingh's _Annales_, ed. Klaproth, Paris,
1834, p. 406.

[26] In the volume already referred to, entitled _Supplement to China
Materials_, etc., in the India Office, the following extract from a
letter of Cocks is given as coming from "Damaged Papers", ii. no. 5,
which can no longer be identified:--"I forgot to note downe how the
Emperours Councell, when they saw me earnestly pursue the enlarging of
our previleges, tould me that they made accompt it was not unknowne
unto us the order the Emperor of China did take for keeping strangers
from entering his dominions, alowing the Spaniards and Portingales no
port to enter into, but only Amacau; yt being but a littell point or
rock of noe emportance. Unto which I replied that their previleges were
far better then ours, in respect they pay no duties but only a certain
sum of money for ancorage of their shipps, neither were bound to goe to
the Emperours court with any present yearely, as we doe, spending more
money in going up and downe then the ancorage of their shipping cometh
unto. As also the Portingales of Amacau have lycense to goe yearely to
the greate cittie of Canton both to buy and sell such commodities as
they have, and had boates provided by the King of China to carry them
up and downe with their goods. So that I wished the Emperour of Japan
would make our previleges equall with the Portingales at Amacau. Unto
which they answered littell, but in smiling sort passed it over."

[27] Rundall, _Memorials_, p. 184.

[28] "Au Japon se trouvaient encore trente-quatre membres de la
Compagnie, tant à Nangasaki qu'en différentes provinces; cinq
Franciscains, cinq ou six Dominicains, un Augustin, et cinq prêtres
séculiers Japonais. La plupart de ces religieux et prêtres étaient
cachés à Nangasaki."--Pagés, _Hist. de la Religion Chrétienne au
Japon_, 1869, p. 347.

[29] Father João Baptista Machado, Jesuit, and Pedro de l'Assumpcion,
Franciscan, whose martyrdoms are narrated by Pagés.

[30] "He was made an officer and given the revenues of the village of
Hémi, in Sagami, near the modern Yokosuka, where are situated the dry
docks, machine-shops, and ship-building houses in which the modern
war vessels of the imperial navy are built and launched--a fitting
location, so near the ground made classic by this exile from the
greatest marine nation in the world."--Griffis, _The Mikado's Empire_,
1876, p. 262.

[31] Saris makes an interesting remark on this practice of the
Dutch:--"Before our coming they passed generally by the name of
Englishmen, for our English nation hath been long known by report
among them, but much scandalled by the Portugals Jesuits as pirates
and rovers upon the seas; so that the naturals have a song which they
call the English Crofonia, shewing how the English do take the Spanish
ships, which they (singing) do act likewise in gesture with their
cattans by their sides, with which song and acting they terrify and
scare their children, as the French sometimes did theirs with the name
of the Lord Talbot."--_Purchas_, i. 368.

[32] The letter printed in _Purchas_, i. 411, is, by a printer's error,
dated 1610, instead of 1620.

[33] Cocks mentions another child at Firando.

[34] Adams left a will, drawn up apparently in duplicate, in English
and Japanese. It was formerly preserved in the archives of the East
India Company. In the MS. volume, T. (b), vol. i. _Supplement to China
Materials_, the English document is referred to as being among the
"Collection of wills", and the Japanese version as among "Foreign
papers". In 1850, Mr. Rundall appears to have seen the Japanese, but
not the English, version, for he states that "the will of William
Adams, in Japanese, is preserved among the records of the Honourable
the East India Company", but that "a translation has not been traced"
(_Memorials of the Empire of Japon_, p. 87). He also quotes the
Inventory of the Estate of Capt. William Adams, showing that the value
of the property was about £500. I regret to say that these documents
cannot now be found in the India Office, although, by the kindness of
Mr. C. C. Prinsep, I have had every assistance in making a search.

Mr. Griffis, in _The Mikado's Empire_, 1876, p. 262, gives the
following interesting particulars respecting Adams and his last
resting-place:--"Will Adams had a son and daughter born to him in
Japan, and there are still living Japanese who claim descent from
him. One of the streets of Yedo was named after him Anjin Cho (Pilot
Street), and the people of that street still hold an annual celebration
on the 15th of June in his honor, one of which I attended in 1873.
When Adams died, he, and afterwards his Japanese wife, were buried
on the summit of one of the lovely hills overlooking the Bay of
Yedo, Goldsborough Inlet, and the surrounding beautiful and classic
landscape. Adams chose the spot himself. The people of Yedo erected
memorial-stone lanterns at his tomb. Parry's fleet, in 1854, anchored
within the very shadow of the Englishman's sepulchre. In May, 1872,
Mr. Walter, of Yokohama, after a study of Hildreth and some search,
discovered the tomb which others had sought for in vain. Two neat stone
shafts in the characteristic style of native monumental architecture,
set on a stone pediment, mark the spot. I visited it, in company of the
bonze in charge of the Shin shin temple of the village, in July, 1873."

[35] See an account of their martyrdom in Pagés, _Hist. de la Religion
Chrétienne an Japon_, pp. 498, _sqq._

[36] _I.e._, Andrea Dittis. This word is also written in other letters
"Nokada" and "Nakauda"; and appears to be the Japanese word _Nakodo_, a
go-between or agent.

[37] India Office. MS.T.(b.), vol. i. _Supplement to China Materials_,
p. 428. The abstract is referred to "Books received from India, no.
10-29."

[38] See the _Calendar of Colonial State Papers_, 1622-1624, no. 415.

[39] I would also draw attention to a curious expression (ii. 293):
"Comend me to all our frendes, _both hees and howes_". Can this form of
_she_ be a survival of Anglo-Saxon _heo_?

[40] Probably _The Mahumetane or Turkish Historie_, by Ralph Carr, 1600.

[41] _St. Augustine, of the Citie of God. With the learned comments of
Jo. Lod. Vives._ Englished by J. H. 1610.

[42] India Office. _Court Minute Books_, vol. ix, f. 203.

[43] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. xxviii, no. 3041.

[44] Particulars relating to the different proposals and attempts to
re-open trade with Japan are collected in the MS. _Supplement to China
Materials_, already referred to.

[45] _Purchas_, i. 373.

[46] _Ibid._, i. 406.

[47] Cocks usually reckons in the Japanese currency of _taels_, _mace_,
and _candareens_, or as he terms them _taies_, _mas_, and _condrins_.
The _tael_ is worth 10 _mace_, or 100 _candareens_; and is of the value
of about six shillings, according to present computation. Cock puts it
at five shillings.

[48] The _real_ of eight, or Spanish dollar of exchange.

[49] The China captain and his brother Whow or Whaw are constantly
met with. I have found it more convenient to give in the Preface what
account I have been able to gather of the different persons mentioned
in the course of the Diary.

[50] Nagasaki.

[51] The Loo-choo or Riukiu group of islands, S.W. of Japan.

[52] _Dono_, a title of respect.

[53] Ogosho Samme is Iyéyasu, the founder of the Tokugawa dynasty of
Shoguns, which lasted down to the revolution of 1868. _Samme_, as Cock
writes it, is _Sama_, a title of respect appended to the name. Fidaia
Samme is Hideyori, son of the famous Hideyoshi, the great warrior,
better known as Taiko Sama. Hideyoshi, although holding supreme power,
never received the title of Shogun. On his death he named his son
Hideyori, then a child of six years, his successor, appointing at
the same time a council of regency, in which Iyéyasu held the chief
place. Iyéyasu's increasing power and popularity naturally roused the
jealousy of others, the result being a struggle between an eastern army
under Iyéyasu, and a western army led by his rivals and supporters
of Hideyori. His great victory at Sekigahara, in 1600, confirmed the
power of Iyéyasu for many years. In 1603, he was created Shogun by the
Mikado. But Hideyori was not yet disposed of. He rose against Iyéyasu
in 1614, but was besieged in Osaka; and a truce was patched up. But
almost immediately Hideyori was again in arms with a following of
120,000 men, and intrenched himself at Osaka. The place was stormed,
Hideyori's troops were utterly defeated, and he and his mother
perished. Rumours of his escape lived for a long time among the people,
and are frequently noticed in the course of this Diary. Klaproth,
_Annales des Empereurs du Japon_ (London, 1734), p. 410, gives the
following account: "Quelques officiers de l'armée de Fide yori mirent
le feu au château d'Osaka, pour se concilier les bonnes grâces de
Ye yasou, mais ils furent arrêtés dans leur fuite par les gens de
Fide yori et mis à mort. Comme il n'était pas possible d'éteindre
l'incendie, Fide yori se sauva dans le Fiougo, où il s'embarqua pour
le Satsouma sur les bâtimens de cette province, qu'on y avait tenus à
sa disposition en cas de besoin. On prétendit qu'il avait péri dans
l'incendie de ce château, mais ce n'était qu'un bruit répandu pour
favoriser sa fuite."

[54] Karatsu, on the N.W. coast of the neighbouring island of Kiushiu.

[55] ? Allowaies=aloes, a cotton material.

[56] Satsuma, the province in the S.W. of the island of Kiushiu.

[57] Shimonoseki strait.

[58] Square posts. _Kaku_ = square. More properly _kaku-bashira_ = a
square post.

[59] Nanking.

[60] _Corge_, an Indian measure of 20 pieces.

[61] The materials here mentioned appear to be Indian cotton goods.

[62] The Daimio of Satsuma had lately, in 1609, subdued the Loo-choo
Islands.

[63] Fukuoka, in the north of Kiushiu.

[64] Shongo Samme is Cocks' way of rendering _Shogun_. Iyéyasu held
the Shogunate only two years, and in 1605 transferred that title to
his son Hidetada, though still retaining much power. Hideyori (Fidaia
Sama) had married Hidetada's daughter, who, when Osaka was on the
point of being captured, was sent out of that fortress to her father.

[65] Two Jesuit priests were present in Osaka.

[66] "The _managoga_ contains 10,000 _ickmagogs_; the _ickmagog_,
1,000 _icgogas_; the latter, 100 _gantas_, or 300 _cocas_."--Kelly,
_Universal Cambist_.

[67] _Bugiyo_, a superintendent.

[68] 16 _taels_ make a _catti_; 100 _cattis_, a _picul_. A _picul_
weighs about 130 lbs. avoirdupois.

[69] The head of the Dutch factory.

[70] Plate once melted.

[71] Interpreter.

[72] _Katabira_, a thin summer garment.

[73] Petty kings, or daimios.

[74] _Katana_, a sword.

[75] Dishes fitting into each other.

[76] _Wakizashi_, a short sword. Saris compares it to a "Welsh hook".

[77] In Omura, in Kiushiu.

[78] _Danko_, consultation.

[79] Higo, the western province of Kiushiu.

[80] Ruptured.

[81] In the south of the province of Hizen.

[82] Suruga.

[83] Omura, near Nagasaki, in Hizen.

[84] ? _Awomori sake_, a strong spirit, used chiefly in the southern
provinces.

[85] Span. _bonito_, tunny.

[86] _I.e._, after the fashion of Japan. _Katachi_, figure, form.

[87] Small junks.

[88] Dollars.

[89] _Koromo_, a robe.

[90] Span. _recado_, a present.

[91] Copesmate, a partner, fellow-buyer.

[92] Decemviri, meaning, no doubt, his followers.

[93] It does not appear who was this John Devin, whose "entertainment"
was so proverbial.

[94] In April 1614.

[95] Henry Frederic, born 2nd January 1614.

[96] Margaret, daughter of Charles Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy, had married
Francis III, Duke of Mantua. She was now a widow, but did not marry the
King of Spain.

[97] Probably a slip for "Manillia".

[98] Sing wine.

[99] _Furo_, literally a bath. Here used apparently for a dwelling
house.

[100] The Dairi, or Mikado.

[101] "The highest subject generally received at the Emperor's hands
the title of Kwanbakku (lit., the white boundary line), first given
A.D. 880."--Dickson's _Japan_, p. 71.

[102] A _tattamy_ = about 6¼ feet.

[103] Temples.

[104] Span. _trampa_, trap.

[105] Bars. Hence the term gad-steel.

[106] Slippers. Fr. _pantoufles_.

[107] Perhaps a slip of the pen for "fixed across".

[108] _Chowtars_, a kind of calico.

[109] _Allegeas_ or _allegias_, an Indian stuff, made from cotton or
grass.

[110] _Naginata_, a large-headed lance, or halberd.

[111] A _slurbow_, a kind of crossbow.

[112] Portug., _capitão mór_, captain-in-chief.

[113] _Borel_, coarse woollen cloth.

[114] _Biyo-bu_, a screen.

[115] ? _Maki_, a roll.

[116] Rudder.

[117] The neighbouring island of Iki or Ikshiu.

[118] Formosa.

[119] Span. _recado_, message.

[120] The wheels of pulleys.

[121] To _would_, to bind ropes about a mast to strengthen it.--Admiral
Smith's _Seaman's Grammar_, 1692.

[122] _Touse_, or _toze_: to unravel.

[123] _Fune_, a boat.

[124] _Tabi_, stockings or socks.

[125] _Tatami_, a mat; used also for a measure of about 6 × 3 ft.

[126] _Mochi_, a cake.

[127] ? Cringe, in the sense of to constrain; and so to stickle, or
haggle.

[128] _Watchet_, pale blue.

[129] _I.e._, duplicate copies.

[130] Span. _andar en dares y tomares_, to quarrel.

[131] Span. _patache_, a tender, or small vessel.

[132] _Bodsu_, a bonze, or Buddhist priest.

[133] Boards.

[134] In the margin is a note--"A letter to Mr. Eaton". Cocks has here
retained the words of his letter.

[135] _Dire_ = _tera_, in composition _dera_, a temple. _Yamabushi_, an
order of travelling priests.

[136] _Sipres_, or _cipress_: a kind of gauze or crape.

[137] Span. _recado_, message.

[138] Fukae, on the north coast of Kiushiu.

[139] Hindustani, pickles.

[140] _Cha_, tea.

[141] Cummerbands.

[142] The metal piece protecting the end of the scabbard.

[143] Perhaps implements and fittings for hawking.

[144] A bezoar, formerly thought an antidote.

[145] Raspberries.

[146] Yuthia.

[147] _I.e._, rich.

[148] Nagoya.

[149] Shimonoseki.

[150] Kaminoseki.

[151] "Caminogari," in Kæmpfer's map.

[152] "Utaymado," in Kæmpfer's map.

[153] Fushimi.

[154] Hirakata.

[155] Otsu.

[156] Kusatsu.

[157] Minakuchi.

[158] Tsuchiyama.

[159] Kameyama.

[160] Shirako.

[161] Miya.

[162] Okazaki.

[163] Yoshida.

[164] Arai.

[165] Hamamatsu.

[166] Mitske.

[167] An income of ten thousand _koku_ of rice. A _koku_==5·13 bushels.

[168] Kakegawa.

[169] _Norimono_, sedan-chair.

[170] Missaka.

[171] Fujieta.

[172] Suruga.

[173] Kambara.

[174] Hara.

[175] Mishima.

[176] Hakone.

[177] Odawara.

[178] Oiso.

[179] Fujisawa.

[180] Totska.

[181] ? _Ubai_, plums.

[182] The _Koban_ was intrinsically worth £1 : 3 : 1; the _Ichibu_,
1_s._ 5¼_d._ But the proportionate value of gold to silver in Japan was
as four to one, instead of the common valuation of fifteen to one.

[183] ? Tyamong, in Sumatra.

[184] Misaki, at the extreme south of the peninsula on the west of the
entrance into Yedo Bay.

[185] Kawasaki.

[186] Blank in MS.

[187] ? Span., _tuerto_, blind of one eye.

[188] _Samisen_, a guitar of three strings.

[189] A marginal note in contradiction of some of the details is as
follows: "This man did not kill his sonne, nether will the Empror let
him nor the other have the land, for that the sonne of so unworthie a
father is not fit to inherit, as he saieth."

[190] Kanagawa.

[191] Kamakura.

[192] Blank in MS. He refers to Yoritomo.

[193] _Side note._--"The littell doughter of Fidaia Samma is shorne non
in this monestary, only to save her life, for it is a sanctuary and no
justis may take her out."

[194] The great copper figure of Buddha or Daiboods.

[195] Fujisawa.

[196] Oiso.

[197] Odawara.

[198] Hakone yama, or the mountain pass of Hakone.

[199] Mishima.

[200] Kambara.

[201] Yui.

[202] Ejiri.

[203] Suruga.

[204] Fujieta.

[205] Kakegawa.

[206] Mitake.

[207] Arai.

[208] Yoshida.

[209] Fugikawa.

[210] Narami.

[211] Miya.

[212] Kuwana.

[213] Seki.

[214] Ishibe.

[215] _Roku-shaku_, a chair-bearer.

[216] Otsu.

[217] Hizen.

[218] Fushimi.

[219] Kagoshima.

[220] Diaboods, or Buddha. The colossal figure was melted down and
coined into "cash" in 1664.--Dickson, _Japan_, 1869, p. 400.

[221] _I.e._, the title of _Kuwambaku_, conferred on the highest
subject in the State.

[222] Span. _Dar_, or _hacer_, _higas_, to ridicule.

[223] _Makiye_, lacquer.

[224] Fushimi.

[225] Hirakata.

[226] Sapan wood.

[227] Boat.

[228] Bingo, in the main island.

[229] Tomu, in the province of Bingo.

[230] Higo.

[231] Kaminoseki.

[232] Shimonoseki.

[233] Half-cast.

[234] Hang-chow.

[235] The island of Shikoku.

[236] Affix signature.

[237] Perhaps Seto, a little to the north of Nagasaki.

[238] Almond cake or biscuit.

[239] ? Galls.

[240] Mortaza Ali.

[241] _Sakadzuki._

[242] Admiral.

[243] Champon, in the Gulf of Siam.

[244] See the notice of these events in the account of Peyton's second
voyage to the East Indies, in Purchas's _Pilgrimes_, 1625, part I, lib.
iv, cap. 15.

[245] Screens.

[246] Yuthia.

[247] George Dowriche, son of Robert Dowriche.--Tuckett, _Devonshire
Pedigrees_.

[248] Mauritius.

[249] _Calambac_, the finest aloe wood.

[250] Blank in MS.

[251] These words struck out.

[252] _Bon_, the feast of lanterns.

[253] Space left in MS.

[254] _Perpetuana_, a woollen stuff.

[255] Cassia.

[256] ? Persian: _poshak_, a garment.

[257] Nagoya.

[258] _Rosa solis_, a pleasant liquor, made of brandy, cinnamon,
etc.--Bailey's _Dictionary_.

[259] Yu, in the province of Suwo, in the main island.

[260] Tomu in Bingo, in Kæmpfer's map.

[261] Utsymado and Muru, in Kæmpfer's map.

[262] Takasago.

[263] _Contore_ or _counter_, a counting table or desk.

[264] Go Yô seï in, who resigned office in 1612.

[265] Otsu.

[266] Muki. A blank left in the MS., but the name is given under the
next day.

[267] Perhaps this may mean _barrage_, a cloth, made of _bariga_, or
Indian silk.

[268] Another form seems to be _serone_.

[269] Span. _quintal_, a hundredweight.

[270] ? Black man. Dutch, _zwart_.

[271] Blank in MS.

[272] Hizen.

[273] A technical term for a band of musicians. See an entry in
Alleyn's _Diary_ (in this same year, 8 Dec., 1617), "given a noyse off
trumpeters yt sownded, 0 : 2 : 6".--G. F. Warner, _Catalogue of MSS. of
Dulwich College_, 1881, p. 167.