Envy - a pathological manifestation of destructive aggressiveness - is 
distinct from jealousy. 

The New Oxford Dictionary of English defines envy as:

"A feeling of discontented or resentful longing aroused by someone 
else's possessions, qualities, or luck ... Mortification and ill-will 
occasioned by the contemplation of another's superior advantages". 

Pathological envy - the fourth deadly sin - is engendered by the 
realization of some lack, deficiency, or inadequacy in oneself. The 
envious begrudge others their success, brilliance, happiness, beauty, 
good fortune, or wealth. Envy provokes misery, humiliation, and 
impotent rage. 

The envious copes with his pernicious emotions in five ways:

1. They attack the perceived source of frustration in an attempt to 
destroy it, or "reduce it" to their "size". Such destructive impulses 
often assume the disguise of championing social causes, fighting 
injustice, touting reform, or promoting an ideology.

2. They seek to subsume the object of envy by imitating it. In extreme 
cases, they strive to get rich quick through criminal scams, or 
corruption. They endeavor to out-smart the system and shortcut their 
way to fortune and celebrity.

3. They resort to self-deprecation. They idealize the successful, the 
rich, the mighty, and the lucky and attribute to them super-human, 
almost divine, qualities. At the same time, they humble themselves. 
Indeed, most of this strain of the envious end up disenchanted and 
bitter, driving the objects of their own erstwhile devotion and 
adulation to destruction and decrepitude.

4. They experience cognitive dissonance. These people devalue the 
source of their frustration and envy by finding faults in everything 
they most desire and in everyone they envy. 

5. They avoid the envied person and thus the agonizing pangs of envy.

Envy is not a new phenomenon. Belisarius, the general who conquered the 
world for Emperor Justinian, was blinded and stripped of his assets by 
his envious peers. I - and many others - have written extensively about 
envy in command economies. Nor is envy likely to diminish. 

In his book, "Facial Justice", Hartley describes a post-apocalyptic 
dystopia, New State, in which envy is forbidden and equality extolled 
and everything enviable is obliterated. Women are modified to look like 
men and given identical "beta faces". Tall buildings are razed.

Joseph Schumpeter, the prophetic Austrian-American economist, believed 
that socialism will disinherit capitalism. In "Capitalism, Socialism, 
and Democracy" he foresaw a conflict between a class of refined but 
dirt-poor intellectuals and the vulgar but filthy rich businessmen and 
managers they virulently envy and resent. Samuel Johnson wrote: "He was 
dull in a new way, and that made many people think him great." The 
literati seek to tear down the market economy which they feel has so 
disenfranchised and undervalued them.

Hitler, who fancied himself an artist, labeled the British a "nation of 
shopkeepers" in one of his bouts of raging envy. Ralph Reiland, the 
Kenneth Simon professor of free enterprise at Robert Morris University, 
quotes David Brooks of the "weekly Standard", who christened this 
phenomenon "bourgeoisophobia":

"The hatred of the bourgeoisie is the beginning of all virtue' - wrote 
Gustav Flaubert. He signed his letters "Bourgeoisophobus" to show how 
much he despised 'stupid grocers and their ilk ... Through some 
screw-up in the great scheme of the universe, their narrow-minded greed 
had brought them vast wealth, unstoppable power and growing social 
prestige." 

Reiland also quotes from Ludwig van Mises's "The Anti-Capitalist 
Mentality":

"Many people, and especially intellectuals, passionately loathe 
capitalism. In a society based on caste and status, the individual can 
ascribe adverse fate to conditions beyond his control. In ... 
capitalism ... everybody's station in life depends on his doing ... 
(what makes a man rich is) not the evaluation of his contribution from 
any `absolute' principle of justice but the evaluation on the part of 
his fellow men who exclusively apply the yardstick of their personal 
wants, desires and ends ... Everybody knows very well that there are 
people like himself who succeeded where he himself failed. Everybody 
knows that many of those he envies are self-made men who started from 
the same point from which he himself started. Everybody is aware of his 
own defeat. In order to console himself and to restore his self- 
assertion, such a man is in search of a scapegoat. 

He tries to persuade himself that he failed through no fault of his 
own. He was too decent to resort to the base tricks to which his 
successful rivals owe their ascendancy. The nefarious social order does 
not accord the prizes to the most meritorious men; it crowns the 
dishonest, unscrupulous scoundrel, the swindler, the exploiter, the 
`rugged individualist.'"

In "The Virtue of Prosperity", Dinesh D'Souza accuses prosperity and 
capitalism of inspiring vice and temptation. Inevitably, it provokes 
envy in the poor and depravity in the rich. 

With only a modicum of overstatement, capitalism can be depicted as the 
sublimation of jealousy. As opposed to destructive envy - jealousy 
induces emulation. Consumers - responsible for two thirds of America's 
GDP - ape role models and vie with neighbors, colleagues, and family 
members for possessions and the social status they endow. Productive 
and constructive competition - among scientists, innovators, managers, 
actors, lawyers, politicians, and the members of just about every other 
profession - is driven by jealousy.

The eminent Nobel prize winning British economist and philosopher of 
Austrian descent, Friedrich Hayek, suggested in "The Constitution of 
Liberty" that innovation and progress in living standards are the 
outcomes of class envy. The wealthy are early adopters of expensive and 
unproven technologies. The rich finance with their conspicuous 
consumption the research and development phase of new products. The 
poor, driven by jealousy, imitate them and thus create a mass market 
which allows manufacturers to lower prices. 

But jealousy is premised on the twin beliefs of equality and a level 
playing field. "I am as good, as skilled, and as talented as the object 
of my jealousy." - goes the subtext - "Given equal opportunities, 
equitable treatment, and a bit of luck, I can accomplish the same or 
more."

Jealousy is easily transformed to outrage when its presumptions - 
equality, honesty, and fairness - prove wrong. In a paper recently 
published by Harvard University's John M. Olin Center for Law and 
titled "Executive Compensation in America: Optimal Contracting or 
Extraction of Rents?", the authors argue that executive malfeasance is 
most effectively regulated by this "outrage constraint":

"Directors (and non-executive directors) would be reluctant to approve, 
and executives would be hesitant to seek, compensation arrangements 
that might be viewed by observers as outrageous."


The Case of the Compressed Image

By: Sam Vaknin, Ph.D.

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

Also Read:

The Disruptive Engine - Innovation



Forgent Networks from Texas wants to collect a royalty every time 
someone compresses an image using the JPEG algorithm. It urges third 
parties to negotiate with it separate licensing agreements. It bases 
its claim on a 17 year old patent it acquired in 1997 when VTel, from 
which Forgent was spun-off, purchased the San-Jose based Compression 
Labs. 

The patent pertains to a crucial element in the popular compression 
method. The JPEG committee of ISO - the International Standards 
Organization - threatens to withdraw the standard altogether. This 
would impact thousands of software and hardware products.

This is only the latest in a serious of spats. Unisys has spent the 
better part of the last 15 years trying to enforce a patent it owns for 
a compression technique used in two other popular imaging standards, 
GIF and TIFF. 

BT Group sued Prodigy, a unit of SBC Communications, in a US federal 
court, for infringement of its patent of the hypertext link, or 
hyperlink - a ubiquitous and critical element of the Web. Dell Computer 
has agreed with the FTC to refrain from enforcing a graphics patent 
having failed to disclose it to the standards committee in its 
deliberations of the VL-bus graphics standard.

"Wired" reported yesterday that the Munich Upper Court declared "deep 
linking" - posting links to specific pages within a Web site - in 
violation the European Union "Database Directive". The directive 
copyrights the "selection and arrangement" of a database - even if the 
content itself is not owned by the database creator. It explicitly 
prohibits hyperlinking to the database contents as "unfair extraction". 
If upheld, this would cripple most search engines. Similar rulings - 
based on national laws - were handed down in other countries, the 
latest being Denmark. 

Amazon sued Barnes and Noble - and has since settled out of court in 
March - for emulating its patented "one click purchasing" business 
process. A Web browser command to purchase an item generates a "cookie" 
- a text file replete with the buyer's essential details which is then 
lodged in Amazon's server. This allows the transaction to be completed 
without a further confirmation step.

A clever trick, no doubt. But even Jeff Bezos, Amazon's legendary 
founder, expressed doubts regarding the wisdom of the US Patent Office 
in granting his company the patent. In an open letter to Amazon's 
customers, he called for a rethinking of the whole system of protection 
of intellectual property in the Internet age.

In a recently published discourse of innovation and property rights, 
titled "The Free-Market Innovation Machine", William Baumol of 
Princeton University claims that only capitalism guarantees growth 
through a steady flow of innovation. According to popular lore, 
capitalism makes sure that innovators are rewarded for their time and 
skills since property rights are enshrined in enforceable contracts. 

Reality is different, as Baumol himself notes. Innovators tend to 
maximize their returns by sharing their technology and licensing it to 
more efficient and profitable manufacturers. This rational division of 
labor is hampered by the increasingly more stringent and expansive 
intellectual property laws that afflict many rich countries nowadays. 
These statutes tend to protect the interests of middlemen - 
manufacturers, distributors, marketers - rather than the claims of 
inventors and innovators. 

Moreover, the very nature of "intellectual property" is in flux. 
Business processes and methods, plants, genetic material, strains of 
animals, minor changes to existing technologies - are all patentable. 
Trademarks and copyright now cover contents, brand names, and modes of 
expression and presentation. Nothing is safe from these encroaching 
juridical initiatives. Intellectual property rights have been 
transformed into a myriad pernicious monopolies which threaten to 
stifle innovation and competition.

Intellectual property - patents, content libraries, copyrighted 
material, trademarks, rights of all kinds - are sometimes the sole 
assets - and the only hope for survival - of cash-strapped and 
otherwise dysfunctional or bankrupt firms. 

Both managers and court-appointed receivers strive to monetize these 
properties and patent-portfolios by either selling them or enforcing 
the rights against infringing third parties. 

Fighting a patent battle in court is prohibitively expensive and the 
outcome uncertain. Potential defendants succumb to extortionate demands 
rather than endure the Kafkaesque process. The costs are passed on to 
the consumer. Sony, for instance already paid Forgent an undisclosed 
amount in May. According to Forgent's 10-Q form, filed on June 17, 
2002, yet another, unidentified "prestigious international" company, 
parted with $15 million in April. 

In commentaries written in 1999-2000 by Harvard law professor, Lawrence 
Lessig, for "The Industry Standard", he observed:

"There is growing skepticism among academics about whether such 
state-imposed monopolies help a rapidly evolving market such as the 
Internet. What is "novel," "nonobvious" or "useful" is hard enough to 
know in a relatively stable field. In a transforming market, it's 
nearly impossible..."

The very concept of intellectual property is being radically 
transformed by the onslaught of new technologies.

The myth of intellectual property postulates that entrepreneurs assume 
the risks associated with publishing books, recording records, and 
inventing only because - and where - the rights to intellectual 
property are well defined and enforced. In the absence of such rights, 
creative people are unlikely to make their works accessible to the 
public. Ultimately, it is the public which pays the price of piracy and 
other violations of intellectual property rights, goes the refrain. 

This is untrue. In the USA only few authors actually live by their pen. 
Even fewer musicians, not to mention actors, eke out subsistence level 
income from their craft.  Those who do can no longer be considered 
merely creative people. Madonna, Michael Jackson, Schwarzenegger and 
Grisham are businessmen at least as much as they are artists. 

Intellectual property is a relatively new notion. In the near past, no 
one considered knowledge or the fruits of creativity (artwork, designs) 
as 'patentable', or as someone's 'property'. The artist was but a mere 
channel through which divine grace flowed. Texts, discoveries, 
inventions, works of art and music, designs - all belonged to the 
community and could be replicated freely. True, the chosen ones, the 
conduits, were revered. But they were rarely financially rewarded. 

Well into the 19th century, artists and innovators were commissioned - 
and salaried - to produce their works of art and contrivances. 

The advent of the Industrial Revolution - and the imagery of the 
romantic lone inventor toiling on his brainchild in a basement or, 
later, a garage -  gave rise to the patent. The more massive the 
markets became, the more sophisticated the sales and marketing 
techniques, the bigger the financial stakes - the larger loomed the 
issue of intellectual property. 

Intellectual property rights are less about the intellect and more 
about property. In every single year of the last decade, the global 
turnover in intellectual property has outweighed the total industrial 
production of the world. These markets being global, the monopolists of 
intellectual products fight unfair competition globally. A pirate in 
Skopje is in direct rivalry with Bill Gates, depriving Microsoft of 
present and future revenue, challenging its monopolistic status as well 
as jeopardizing its competition-deterring image. 

The Open Source Movement weakens the classic model of property rights 
by presenting an alternative, viable, vibrant, model which does not 
involve over-pricing and anti-competitive predatory practices. The 
current model of property rights encourages monopolistic behavior, 
non-collaborative, exclusionary innovation (as opposed, for instance, 
to Linux), and litigiousness. The Open Source movement exposes the 
myths underlying current property rights philosophy and is thus 
subversive.

But the inane expansion of intellectual property rights may merely be a 
final spasm, threatened by the ubiquity of the Internet as they are. 
Free scholarly online publications nibble at the heels of their pricey 
and anticompetitive offline counterparts. 

Electronic publishing poses a threat - however distant - to print 
publishing. Napster-like peer to peer networks undermine the 
foundations of the music and film industries. Open source software is 
encroaching on the turf of proprietary applications. It is very easy 
and cheap to publish and distribute content on the Internet, the 
barriers to entry are virtually nil. 

As processors grow speedier, storage larger, applications 
multi-featured, broadband access all-pervasive, and the Internet goes 
wireless - individuals are increasingly able to emulate much larger 
scale organizations successfully. A single person, working from home, 
with less than $2000 worth of equipment - can publish a Webzine, author 
software, write music, shoot digital films, design products, or 
communicate with millions and his work will be indistinguishable from 
the offerings of the most endowed corporations and institutions. 

Obviously, no individual can yet match the capital assets, the 
marketing clout, the market positioning, the global branding, the sales 
organization, and the distribution network of the likes of Sony, or 
Microsoft. In an age of information glut, it is still the marketing, 
the media campaign, the distribution, and the sales that determine the 
economic outcome. 

This advantage, however, is also being eroded, albeit glacially. 

The Internet is essentially a free marketing and - in the case of 
digital goods - distribution channel. It directly reaches 200 million 
people all over the world. Even with a minimum investment, the 
likelihood of being seen by surprisingly large numbers of consumers is 
high. 

Various business models are emerging or reasserting themselves - from 
ad sponsored content to packaged open source software. 

Many creative people - artists, authors, innovators - are repelled by 
the commercialization of their intellect and muse. They seek - and find 
- alternatives to the behemoths of manufacturing, marketing and 
distribution that today control the bulk of intellectual property. Many 
of them go freelance. Indie music labels, independent cinema, print on 
demand publishing - are omens of things to come.

This inexorably leads to disintermediation - the removal of middlemen 
between producer or creator and consumer. The Internet enables niche 
marketing and restores the balance between the creative genius and the 
commercial exploiters of his product. This is a return to 
pre-industrial times when artisans ruled the economic scene. 

Work mobility increases in this landscape of shifting allegiances, head 
hunting, remote collaboration, contract and agency work, and similar 
labour market trends. Intellectual property is likely to become as 
atomized as labor and to revert to its true owners - the inspired 
folks. They, in turn, will negotiate licensing deals directly with 
their end users and customers. 

Capital, design, engineering, and labor intensive goods - computer 
chips, cruise missiles, and passenger cars - will still necessitate the 
coordination of a massive workforce in multiple locations. But even 
here, in the old industrial landscape, the intellectual contribution to 
the collective effort will likely be outsourced to roving freelancers 
who will maintain an ownership stake in their designs or inventions.

This intimate relationship between creative person and consumer is the 
way it has always been. We may yet look back on the 20th century and 
note with amazement the transient and aberrant phase of intermediation 
- the Sony's, Microsoft's, and Forgent's of this world.


The Fabric of Economic Trust 

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin 

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

Economics acquired its dismal reputation by pretending to be an exact 
science rather than a branch of mass psychology. In truth it is a 
narrative struggling to describe the aggregate behavior of humans. It 
seeks to cloak its uncertainties and shifting fashions with 
mathematical formulae and elaborate econometric computerized models. 

So much is certain, though - that people operate within markets, free 
or regulated, patchy or organized. They attach numerical (and 
emotional) values to their inputs (work, capital) and to their 
possessions (assets, natural endowments). They communicate these values 
to each other by sending out signals known as prices. 

Yet, this entire edifice - the market and its price mechanism - 
critically depends on trust. If people do not trust each other, or the 
economic "envelope" within which they interact - economic activity 
gradually grinds to a halt. There is a strong correlation between the 
general level of trust and the extent and intensity of economic 
activity.

Trust is not a monolithic quantity. There are a few categories of 
economic trust. 

Some forms of trust are akin to a public good and are closely related 
to governmental action or inaction, the reputation of the state and its 
institutions, and its pronounced agenda. Other types of trust are the 
outcomes of kinship, ethnic origin, personal standing and goodwill, 
corporate brands and other data generated by individuals, households, 
and firms. 

I. Trust in the playing field

To transact, people have to maintain faith in a relevant economic 
horizon and in the immutability of the economic playing field or 
"envelope". Put less obscurely, a few hidden assumptions underlie the 
continued economic activity of market players. 

They assume, for instance, that the market will continue to exist for 
the foreseeable future in its current form. That it will remain inert - 
unhindered by externalities like government intervention, geopolitical 
upheavals, crises, abrupt changes in accounting policies and tax laws, 
hyperinflation, institutional and structural reform and other 
market-deflecting events and processes. 

They further assume that their price signals will not be distorted or 
thwarted on a consistent basis thus skewing the efficient and rational 
allocation of risks and rewards. Insider trading, stock manipulation, 
monopolies, hoarding - all tend to consistently but unpredictably 
distort price signals and, thus, deter market participation.

Market players take for granted the existence and continuous operation 
of institutions - financial intermediaries, law enforcement agencies, 
courts. It is important to note that market players prefer continuity 
and certainty to evolution, however gradual and ultimately beneficial. 
A venal bureaucrat is a known quantity and can be tackled effectively. 
A period of transition to good and equitable governance can be more 
stifling than any level of corruption and malfeasance. This is why 
economic activity drops sharply whenever institutions are reformed.

II. Trust in other players

Market players assume that other players are (generally) rational, that 
they have intentions, that they intend to maximize their benefits and 
that they are likely to act on their intentions in a legal (or 
rule-based), rational manner.

III. Trust in market liquidity

Market players assume that other players possess or have access to the 
liquid means they need in order to act on their intentions and 
obligations. They know, from personal experience, that idle capital 
tends to dwindle and that the only way to, perhaps, maintain or 
increase it is to transact with others, directly or through 
intermediaries, such as banks.

IV. Trust in others' knowledge and ability

Market players assume that other players possess or have access to the 
intellectual property, technology, and knowledge they need in order to 
realize their intentions and obligations. 

This implicitly presupposes that all other market players are 
physically, mentally, legally and financially able and willing to act 
their parts as stipulated, for instance, in contracts they sign. 

The emotional dimensions of contracting are often neglected in 
economics. Players assume that their counterparts maintain a realistic 
and stable sense of self-worth based on intimate knowledge of their own 
strengths and weaknesses. Market participants are presumed to harbor 
realistic expectations, commensurate with their skills and 
accomplishments. Allowance is made for exaggeration, disinformation, 
even outright deception - but these are supposed to be marginal 
phenomena.

When trust breaks down - often the result of an external or internal 
systemic shock - people react expectedly. The number of voluntary 
interactions and transactions decreases sharply. With a collapsed 
investment horizon, individuals and firms become corrupt in an effort 
to shortcut their way into economic benefits, not knowing how long will 
the system survive. Criminal activity increases.

People compensate with fantasies and grandiose delusions for their 
growing sense of uncertainty, helplessness, and fears.  This is a 
self-reinforcing mechanism, a vicious cycle which results in 
under-confidence and a fluctuating self esteem. They develop 
psychological defence mechanisms. 

Cognitive dissonance ("I really choose to be poor rather than 
heartless"), pathological envy (seeks to deprive others and thus gain 
emotional reward), rigidity ("I am like that, my family or ethnic group 
has been like that for generations, there is nothing I can do"), 
passive-aggressive behavior (obstructing the work flow, absenteeism, 
stealing from the employer, adhering strictly to arcane regulations) - 
are all reactions to a breakdown in one or more of the four 
aforementioned types of trust. Furthermore, people in a trust crisis 
are unable to postpone gratification. They often become frustrated, 
aggressive, and deceitful if denied. They resort to reckless behavior 
and stopgap economic activities.

In economic environments with compromised and impaired trust, loyalty 
decreases and mobility increases. People switch jobs, renege on 
obligations, fail to repay debts, relocate often. Concepts like 
exclusivity, the sanctity of contracts, workplace loyalty, or a career 
path - all get eroded. As a result, little is invested in the future, 
in the acquisition of skills, in long term savings. Short-termism and 
bottom line mentality rule. 

The outcomes of a crisis of trust are, usually, catastrophic:

Economic activity is much reduced, human capital is corroded and 
wasted, brain drain increases, illegal and extra-legal activities rise, 
society is polarized between haves and haves-not, interethnic and 
inter-racial tensions increase. To rebuild trust in such circumstances 
is a daunting task. The loss of trust is contagious and, finally, it 
infects every institution and profession in the land. It is the stuff 
revolutions are made of.	
Scavenger Economies, 

Predator Economies 

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin 

The national economies of the world can be divided to the scavenger and 
the predator types. The former are parasitic economies which feed off 
the latter. The relationship is often not that of symbiosis, where two 
parties maintain a mutually beneficial co-existence. Here, one economy 
feeds off others in a way, which is harmful, even detrimental to the 
hosts. But this interaction - however undesirable - is the region's 
only hope. 

The typology of scavenger economies reveals their sources of 
sustenance: 

Conjunctural - These economies feed off historical or economic 
conjunctures or crises. They position themselves as a bridge between 
warring or conflicting parties. Switzerland rendered this service to 
Nazi Germany (1933-1945), Macedonia and Greece to Serbia (1992 to the 
present), Cyprus aided and abetted Russia (1987 to the present), Jordan 
for Iraq (1991 to the present), and now, Montenegro acts the part for 
both Serbia and Kosovo. These economies consist of smuggling, siege 
breaking, contraband, arms trade and illegal immigration. 

They benefit economically by violating both international and domestic 
laws and by providing international outcasts and rogues with 
alternative routes of supply, and with goods and services. 

Criminal - These economies are infiltrated by criminal gangs or 
suffused with criminal behaviour. Such infiltration is two phased: the 
properly criminal phase and the money laundering one. In the first 
phase, criminal activities yield income and result in wealth 
accumulation. In the second one, the money thus generated is laundered 
and legitimized. It is invested in legal, above-board activities. The 
economy of the USA during the 19th century and in the years of 
prohibition was partly criminal. It is reminiscent of the Russian 
economy in the 1990s, permeated by criminal conduct as it is. Russians 
often compare their stage of capitalist evolution to the American "Wild 
West". 

Piggyback Service Economies - These are economies, which provide 
predator economies with services. These services are aimed at 
re-establishing economic equilibrium in the host (predator) economies. 
Tax shelters are a fine example of this variety. In many countries 
taxes are way too high and result in the misallocation of economic 
resources. Tax shelters offer a way of re-establishing the economic 
balance and re-instating a regime of efficient allocation of resources. 
These economies could be regarded as external appendages, shock 
absorbers and regulators of their host economies. They feed off market 
failures, market imbalances, arbitrage opportunities, shortages and 
inefficiencies. Many post-Communist countries have either made the 
provision of such services a part of their economic life or are about 
to do so. 

Free zones, off shore havens, off shore banking and transshipment ports 
proliferate, from Macedonia to Archangelsk. 

Aid Economies - Economies that derive most of their vitality from aid 
granted them by donor countries, multilateral aid agencies and NGOs. 
Many of the economies in transition belong to this class. Up to 15% of 
their GDP is in the form of handouts, soft loans and technical 
assistance. Rescheduling is another species of financial subsidy and 
virtually all CEE countries have benefited from it. The dependence thus 
formed can easily deteriorate into addiction. The economic players in 
such economies engage mostly in lobbying and in political manoeuvring - 
rather than in production. 

Derivative or Satellite Economies - These are economies, which are 
absolutely dependent upon or very closely correlated with other 
economies. This is either because they conduct most of their trade with 
these economies, or because they are a (marginal) member of a powerful 
regional club (or aspire to become one), or because they are under the 
economic (or geopolitical or military) umbrella of a regional power or 
a superpower. Another variant is the single-commodity or single-goods 
or single-service economies. Many countries in Africa and many members 
of the OPEC oil cartel rely on a single product for their livelihood. 
Russia, for instance, is heavily dependent on proceeds from the sale of 
its energy products. Most Montenegrins derive their livelihood, 
directly or indirectly, from smuggling, bootlegging and illegal 
immigration. Drugs are a major "export" earner in Macedonia and 
Albania. 

Copycat Economies - These are economies that are based on legal or 
(more often) illegal copying and emulation of intellectual property: 
patents, brandnames, designs, industrial processes, other forms of 
innovation, copyrighted material, etc. The prime example is Japan, 
which constructed its whole mega-economy on these bases. Both Bulgaria 
and Russia are Meccas of piracy. Though prosperous for a time, these 
economies are dependent on and subject to the vicissitudes of business 
cycles. They are capital sensitive, inherently unstable and with no 
real long term prospects if they fail to generate their own 
intellectual property. They reflect the volatility of the markets for 
their goods and are overly exposed to trade risks, international 
legislation and imports. Usually, they specialize in narrow segments of 
manufacturing which only increases the precariousness of their 
situation. 

The Predator Economies can also be classified: 

Generators of Intellectual Property - These are economies that 
encourage and emphasize innovation and progress. They reward 
innovators, entrepreneurs, non-conformism and conflict. They spew out 
patents, designs, brands, copyrighted material and other forms of 
packaged human creativity. They derive most of their income from 
licensing and royalties and constitute one of the engines driving 
globalization. Still, these economies are too poor to support the 
complementary manufacturing and marketing activities. Their natural 
counterparts are the "Industrial Bases". Within the former Eastern 
Bloc, Russia, Poland, Hungary and Slovenia are, to a limited extent, 
such generators. Israel is such an economy in the Middle East. 

Industrial Bases - These are economies that make use of the 
intellectual property generated by the former type within industrial 
processes. They do not copy the intellectual property as it is. Rather, 
they add to it important elements of adaptation to niche markets, image 
creation, market positioning, packaging, technical literature, 
combining it with other products or services, designing and 
implementing the whole production process, market (demand) creation, 
improvement upon the originals and value added services. These 
contributions are so extensive that the end products, or services can 
no longer to be identified with the originals, which serve as mere 
triggers. Again, Poland, Hungary, Slovenia (and to a lesser extent, 
Croatia) come to mind. 

Consumer Oriented Economies - These are Third Wave (Alvin Toffler's 
term), services, information and knowledge driven economies. The 
over-riding set of values is consumer oriented. Wealth formation and 
accumulation are secondary. The primary activities are concerned with 
fostering markets and maintaining them. These "weightless" economies 
concentrate on intangibles: advertising, packaging, marketing, sales 
promotion, education, entertainment, servicing, dissemination of 
information, knowledge formation, trading, trading in symbolic assets 
(mainly financial), spiritual pursuits, and other economic activities 
which enhance the consumer's welfare (pharmaceuticals, for instance). 
These economies are also likely to sport a largish public sector, most 
of it service oriented. No national economy in CEE qualifies as 
"Consumer Oriented", though there are pockets of consumer-oriented 
entrepreneurship within each one. 

The Trader Economies - These economies are equivalent to the 
cardiovascular system. They provide the channels through which goods 
and services are exchanged. They do this by trading or assuming risks, 
by providing physical transportation and telecommunications, and by 
maintaining an appropriately educated manpower to support all these 
activities. These economies are highly dependent on the general health 
of international trade. Many of the CEE economies are Trader economies. 
The openness ratio (trade divided by GDP) of most CEE countries is 
higher than the G7 countries'. Macedonia, for instance, has a GDP of 
3.6 Billion US dollars and exports and imports of c. 2 billion US 
dollars. These are the official figures. Probably, another 0.5 billion 
Us dollars in trade go unreported. additionally, it has one of the 
lowest weighted customs rate in the world. Openness to trade is an 
official policy, actively pursued. 

These economies are predatory in the sense that they engage in zero-sum 
games. A contract gained by a Slovenian company - is a contract lost by 
a Croatian one. Luckily, in this last decade, the economic cake tended 
to grow and the sum of zero sum games was more welfare to all involved. 
These vibrant economies - the hope of benighted and blighted regions - 
are justly described as "engines" because they pull all other 
(scavenger) economies with them. They are not likely to do so forever. 
But their governments have assimilated the lessons of the 1930s. 
Protectionism is bad for everyone involved - especially for economic 
engines. Openness to trade, protection of property rights and 
functioning institutions increase both the number and the scope of 
markets. 


Notes on the Economics of Game Theory 

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin 

Consider this: 

Could Western management techniques be successfully implemented in the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE)? Granted, they have to be 
adapted, modified and cannot be imported in their entirety. But their 
crux, their inalienable nucleus - can this be transported and 
transplanted in CEE? Theory provides us with a positive answer. Human 
agents are the same everywhere and are mostly rational. Practice begs 
to differ. Basic concepts such as the money value of time or the moral 
and legal meaning of property are non existent. The legal, political 
and economic environments are all unpredictable. As a result, economic 
players will prefer to maximize their utility immediately (steal from 
the workplace, for instance) - than to wait for longer term 
(potentially, larger) benefits. Warrants (stock options) convertible to 
the company's shares constitute a strong workplace incentive in the 
West (because there is an horizon and they increase the employee's 
welfare in the long term). Where the future is speculation - 
speculation withers. Stock options or a small stake in his firm, will 
only encourage the employee to blackmail the other shareholders by 
paralysing the firm, to abuse his new position and will be interpreted 
as immunity, conferred from above, from the consequences of illegal 
activities. 

The very allocation of options or shares will be interpreted as a sign 
of weakness, dependence and need, to be exploited. Hierarchy is equated 
with slavery and employees will rather harm their long term interests 
than follow instructions or be subjected to criticism - never mind how 
constructive. The employees in CEE regard the corporate environment as 
a conflict zone, a zero sum game (in which the gains by some equal the 
losses to others). In the West, the employees participate in the 
increase in the firm's value. The difference between these attitudes is 
irreconcilable. 

Now, let us consider this: 

An entrepreneur is a person who is gifted at identifying the 
unsatisfied needs of a market, at mobilizing and organizing the 
resources required to satisfy those needs and at defining a long-term 
strategy of development and marketing. As the enterprise grows, two 
processes combine to denude the entrepreneur of some of his initial 
functions. The firm has ever growing needs for capital: financial, 
human, assets and so on. Additionally, the company begins (or should 
begin) to interface and interact with older, better established firms. 
Thus, the company is forced to create its first management team: a 
general manager with the right doses of respectability, connections and 
skills, a chief financial officer, a host of consultants and so on. In 
theory - if all our properly motivated financially - all these players 
(entrepreneurs and managers) will seek to maximize the value of the 
firm. What happens, in reality, is that both work to minimize it, each 
for its own reasons. The managers seek to maximize their short-term 
utility by securing enormous pay packages and other forms of 
company-dilapidating compensation. 

The entrepreneurs feel that they are "strangled", "shackled", "held 
back" by bureaucracy and they "rebel". They oust the management, or 
undermine it, turning it into an ineffective representative relic. They 
assume real, though informal, control of the firm. They do so by 
defining a new set of strategic goals for the firm, which call for the 
institution of an entrepreneurial rather than a bureaucratic type of 
management. These cycles of initiative-consolidation-new 
initiative-revolution-consolidation are the dynamos of company growth. 
Growth leads to maximization of value. However, the players don't know 
or do not fully believe that they are in the process of maximizing the 
company's worth. On the contrary, consciously, the managers say: "let's 
maximize the benefits that we derive from this company, as long as we 
are still here." The entrepreneurs-owners say: "we cannot tolerate this 
stifling bureaucracy any longer. We prefer to have a smaller company - 
but all ours." The growth cycles forces the entrepreneurs to dilute 
their holdings (in order to raise the capital necessary to finance 
their initiatives). This dilution (the fracturing of the ownership 
structure) is what brings the last cycle to its end. The holdings of 
the entrepreneurs are too small to materialize a coup against the 
management. The management then prevails and the entrepreneurs are 
neutralized and move on to establish another start-up. The only thing 
that they leave behind them is their names and their heirs. 

We can use Game Theory methods to analyse both these situations. 

Wherever we have economic players bargaining for the allocation of 
scarce resources in order to attain their utility functions, to secure 
the outcomes and consequences (the value, the preference, that the 
player attaches to his outcomes) which are right for them - we can use 
Game Theory (GT). 

A short recap of the basic tenets of the theory might be in order. 

GT deals with interactions between agents, whether conscious and 
intelligent - or Dennettic. A Dennettic Agent (DA) is an agent that 
acts so as to influence the future allocation of resources, but does 
not need to be either conscious or deliberative to do so. A Game is the 
set of acts committed by 1 to n rational DA and one a-rational (not 
irrational but devoid of rationality) DA (nature, a random mechanism). 
At least 1 DA in a Game must control the result of the set of acts and 
the DAs must be (at least potentially) at conflict, whole or partial. 
This is not to say that all the DAs aspire to the same things. They 
have different priorities and preferences. They rank the likely 
outcomes of their acts differently. They engage Strategies to obtain 
their highest ranked outcome. A Strategy is a vector, which details the 
acts, with which the DA will react in response to all the (possible) 
acts by the other DAs. An agent is said to be rational if his Strategy 
does guarantee the attainment of his most preferred goal. Nature is 
involved by assigning probabilities to the outcomes. An outcome, 
therefore, is an allocation of resources resulting from the acts of the 
agents. An agent is said to control the situation if its acts matter to 
others to the extent that at least one of them is forced to alter at 
least one vector (Strategy). 

The Consequence to the agent is the value of a function that assigns 
real numbers to each of the outcomes. The consequence represents a list 
of outcomes, prioritized, ranked. It is also known as an ordinal 
utility function. If the function includes relative numerical 
importance measures (not only real numbers) - we call it a Cardinal 
Utility Function. 

Games, naturally, can consist of one player, two players and more than 
two players (n-players). They can be zero (or fixed) - sum (the sum of 
benefits is fixed and whatever gains made by one of the players are 
lost by the others). They can be nonzero-sum (the amount of benefits to 
all players can increase or decrease). Games can be cooperative (where 
some of the players or all of them form coalitions) - or 
non-cooperative (competitive). For some of the games, the solutions are 
called Nash equilibria. They are sets of strategies constructed so that 
an agent which adopts them (and, as a result, secures a certain 
outcome) will have no incentive to switch over to other strategies 
(given the strategies of all other players). Nash equilibria 
(solutions) are the most stable (it is where the system "settles down", 
to borrow from Chaos Theory) - but they are not guaranteed to be the 
most desirable. Consider the famous "Prisoners' Dilemma" in which both 
players play rationally and reach the Nash equilibrium only to discover 
that they could have done much better by collaborating (that is, by 
playing irrationally). Instead, they adopt the "Paretto-dominated", or 
the "Paretto-optimal", sub-optimal solution. Any outside interference 
with the game (for instance, legislation) will be construed as creating 
a NEW game, not as pushing the players to adopt a "Paretto-superior" 
solution. 

The behaviour of the players reveals to us their order of preferences. 
This is called "Preference Ordering" or "Revealed Preference Theory". 
Agents are faced with sets of possible states of the world 
(=allocations of resources, to be more economically inclined). These 
are called "Bundles". In certain cases they can trade their bundles, 
swap them with others. The evidence of these swaps will inevitably 
reveal to us the order of priorities of the agent. All the bundles that 
enjoy the same ranking by a given agent - are this agent's 
"Indifference Sets". The construction of an Ordinal Utility Function 
is, thus, made simple. The indifference sets are numbered from 1 to n. 
These ordinals do not reveal the INTENSITY or the RELATIVE INTENSITY of 
a preference - merely its location in a list. However, techniques are 
available to transform the ordinal utility function - into a cardinal 
one. 

A Stable Strategy is similar to a Nash solution - though not identical 
mathematically. There is currently no comprehensive theory of 
Information Dynamics. Game Theory is limited to the aspects of 
competition and exchange of information (cooperation). Strategies that 
lead to better results (independently of other agents) are dominant and 
where all the agents have dominant strategies - a solution is 
established. Thus, the Nash equilibrium is applicable to games that are 
repeated and wherein each agent reacts to the acts of other agents. The 
agent is influenced by others - but does not influence them (he is 
negligible). The agent continues to adapt in this way - until no longer 
able to improve his position. The Nash solution is less available in 
cases of cooperation and is not unique as a solution. In most cases, 
the players will adopt a minimax strategy (in zero-sum games) or 
maximin strategies (in nonzero-sum games). 

These strategies guarantee that the loser will not lose more than the 
value of the game and that the winner will gain at least this value. 
The solution is the "Saddle Point". 

The distinction between zero-sum games (ZSG) and nonzero-sum games 
(NZSG) is not trivial. A player playing a ZSG cannot gain if prohibited 
to use certain strategies. This is not the case in NZSGs. In ZSG, the 
player does not benefit from exposing his strategy to his rival and is 
never harmed by having foreknowledge of his rival's strategy. Not so in 
NZSGs: at times, a player stands to gain by revealing his plans to the 
"enemy". A player can actually be harmed by NOT declaring his strategy 
or by gaining acquaintance with the enemy's stratagems. The very 
ability to communicate, the level of communication and the order of 
communication - are important in cooperative cases. A Nash solution: 

1. is not dependent upon any utility function; 

2. it is impossible for two players to improve the Nash solution 
(=their position) simultaneously (=the Paretto optimality); 

3. is not influenced by the introduction of irrelevant (not very 
gainful) alternatives; and 

4. is symmetric (reversing the roles of the players does not affect the 
solution). 

The limitations of this approach are immediately evident. It is 
definitely not geared to cope well with more complex, multi-player, 
semi-cooperative (semi-competitive), imperfect information situations. 

Von Neumann proved that there is a solution for every ZSG with 2 
players, though it might require the implementation of mixed strategies 
(strategies with probabilities attached to every move and outcome). 
Together with the economist Morgenstern, he developed an approach to 
coalitions (cooperative efforts of one or more players - a coalition of 
one player is possible). Every coalition has a value - a minimal amount 
that the coalition can secure using solely its own efforts and 
resources. The function describing this value is super-additive (the 
value of a coalition which is comprised of two sub-coalitions equals, 
at least, the sum of the values of the two sub-coalitions). Coalitions 
can be epiphenomenal: their value can be higher than the combined 
values of their constituents. The amounts paid to the players equal the 
value of the coalition and each player stands to get an amount no 
smaller than any amount that he would have made on his own. A set of 
payments to the players, describing the division of the coalition's 
value amongst them, is the "imputation", a single outcome of a 
strategy. A strategy is, therefore, dominant, if: (1) each player is 
getting more under the strategy than under any other strategy and (2) 
the players in the coalition receive a total payment that does not 
exceed the value of the coalition. Rational players are likely to 
prefer the dominant strategy and to enforce it. Thus, the solution to 
an n-players game is a set of imputations. No single imputation in the 
solution must be dominant (=better). They should all lead to equally 
desirable results. On the other hand, all the imputations outside the 
solution should be dominated. Some games are without solution (Lucas, 
1967). 

Auman and Maschler tried to establish what is the right payoff to the 
members of a coalition. They went about it by enlarging upon the 
concept of bargaining (threats, bluffs, offers and counter-offers). 
Every imputation was examined, separately, whether it belongs in the 
solution (=yields the highest ranked outcome) or not, regardless of the 
other imputations in the solution. But in their theory, every member 
had the right to "object" to the inclusion of other members in the 
coalition by suggesting a different, exclusionary, coalition in which 
the members stand to gain a larger payoff. The player about to be 
excluded can "counter-argue" by demonstrating the existence of yet 
another coalition in which the members will get at least as much as in 
the first coalition and in the coalition proposed by his adversary, the 
"objector". Each coalition has, at least, one solution. 

The Game in GT is an idealized concept. Some of the assumptions can - 
and should be argued against. The number of agents in any game is 
assumed to be finite and a finite number of steps is mostly 
incorporated into the assumptions. Omissions are not treated as acts 
(though negative ones). All agents are negligible in their relationship 
to others (have no discernible influence on them) - yet are influenced 
by them (their strategies are not - but the specific moves that they 
select - are). The comparison of utilities is not the result of any 
ranking - because no universal ranking is possible. Actually, no 
ranking common to two or n players is possible (rankings are bound to 
differ among players). Many of the problems are linked to the variant 
of rationality used in GT. It is comprised of a clarity of preferences 
on behalf of the rational agent and relies on the people's tendency to 
converge and cluster around the right answer / move. 

This, however, is only a tendency. Some of the time, players select the 
wrong moves. It would have been much wiser to assume that there are no 
pure strategies, that all of them are mixed. Game Theory would have 
done well to borrow mathematical techniques from quantum mechanics. For 
instance: strategies could have been described as wave functions with 
probability distributions. The same treatment could be accorded to the 
cardinal utility function. Obviously, the highest ranking (smallest 
ordinal) preference should have had the biggest probability attached to 
it - or could be treated as the collapse event. But these are more or 
less known, even trivial, objections. Some of them cannot be overcome. 
We must idealize the world in order to be able to relate to it 
scientifically at all. The idealization process entails the 
incorporation of gross inaccuracies into the model and the ignorance of 
other elements. The surprise is that the approximation yields results, 
which tally closely with reality - in view of its mutilation, affected 
by the model. 

There are more serious problems, philosophical in nature. 

It is generally agreed that "changing" the game can - and very often 
does - move the players from a non-cooperative mode (leading to 
Paretto-dominated results, which are never desirable) - to a 
cooperative one. A government can force its citizens to cooperate and 
to obey the law. It can enforce this cooperation. This is often called 
a Hobbesian dilemma. It arises even in a population made up entirely of 
altruists. Different utility functions and the process of bargaining 
are likely to drive these good souls to threaten to become egoists 
unless other altruists adopt their utility function (their preferences, 
their bundles). 

Nash proved that there is an allocation of possible utility functions 
to these agents so that the equilibrium strategy for each one of them 
will be this kind of threat. This is a clear social Hobbesian dilemma: 
the equilibrium is absolute egoism despite the fact that all the 
players are altruists. This implies that we can learn very little about 
the outcomes of competitive situations from acquainting ourselves with 
the psychological facts pertaining to the players. The agents, in this 
example, are not selfish or irrational - and, still, they deteriorate 
in their behaviour, to utter egotism. A complete set of utility 
functions - including details regarding how much they know about one 
another's utility functions - defines the available equilibrium 
strategies. The altruists in our example are prisoners of the logic of 
the game. Only an "outside" power can release them from their 
predicament and permit them to materialize their true nature. Gauthier 
said that morally-constrained agents are more likely to evade 
Paretto-dominated outcomes in competitive games - than agents who are 
constrained only rationally. But this is unconvincing without the 
existence of an Hobesian enforcement mechanism (a state is the most 
common one). Players would do better to avoid Paretto dominated 
outcomes by imposing the constraints of such a mechanism upon their 
available strategies. Paretto optimality is defined as efficiency, when 
there is no state of things (a different distribution of resources) in 
which at least one player is better off - with all the other no worse 
off. "Better off" read: "with his preference satisfied". This 
definitely could lead to cooperation (to avoid a bad outcome) - but it 
cannot be shown to lead to the formation of morality, however basic. 
Criminals can achieve their goals in splendid cooperation and be 
content, but that does not make it more moral. 

Game theory is agent neutral, it is utilitarianism at its apex. It does 
not prescribe to the agent what is "good" - only what is "right". It is 
the ultimate proof that effort at reconciling utilitarianism with more 
deontological, agent relative, approaches are dubious, in the best of 
cases. Teleology, in other words, in no guarantee of morality. 

Acts are either means to an end or ends in themselves. This is no 
infinite regression. There is bound to be an holy grail (happiness?) in 
the role of the ultimate end. A more commonsense view would be to 
regard acts as means and states of affairs as ends. This, in turn, 
leads to a teleological outlook: acts are right or wrong in accordance 
with their effectiveness at securing the achievement of the right 
goals. Deontology (and its stronger version, absolutism) constrain the 
means. It states that there is a permitted subset of means, all the 
other being immoral and, in effect, forbidden. Game Theory is out to 
shatter both the notion of a finite chain of means and ends culminating 
in an ultimate end - and of the deontological view. It is 
consequentialist but devoid of any value judgement. 

Game Theory pretends that human actions are breakable into much smaller 
"molecules" called games. Human acts within these games are means to 
achieving ends but the ends are improbable in their finality. The means 
are segments of "strategies": prescient and omniscient renditions of 
the possible moves of all the players. Aside from the fact that it 
involves mnemic causation (direct and deterministic influence by past 
events) and a similar influence by the utility function (which really 
pertains to the future) - it is highly implausible. 

Additionally, Game Theory is mired in an internal contradiction: on the 
one hand it solemnly teaches us that the psychology of the players is 
absolutely of no consequence. On the other, it hastens to explicitly 
and axiomatically postulate their rationality and implicitly (and no 
less axiomatically) their benefit-seeking behaviour (though this aspect 
is much more muted). This leads to absolutely outlandish results: 
irrational behaviour leads to total cooperation, bounded rationality 
leads to more realistic patterns of cooperation and competition 
(coopetition) and an unmitigated rational behaviour leads to disaster 
(also known as Paretto dominated outcomes). 

Moreover, Game Theory refuses to acknowledge that real games are 
dynamic, not static. The very concepts of strategy, utility function 
and extensive (tree like) representation are static. The dynamic is 
retrospective, not prospective. To be dynamic, the game must include 
all the information about all the actors, all their strategies, all 
their utility functions. Each game is a subset of a higher level game, 
a private case of an implicit game which is constantly played in the 
background, so to say. This is a hyper-game of which all games are but 
derivatives. It incorporates all the physically possible moves of all 
the players. An outside agency with enforcement powers (the state, the 
police, the courts, the law) are introduced by the players. In this 
sense, they are not really an outside event which has the effect of 
altering the game fundamentally. They are part and parcel of the 
strategies available to the players and cannot be arbitrarily ruled 
out. On the contrary, their introduction as part of a dominant strategy 
will simplify Game theory and make it much more applicable. In other 
words: players can choose to compete, to cooperate and to cooperate in 
the formation of an outside agency. 

There is no logical or mathematical reason to exclude the latter 
possibility. The ability to thus influence the game is a legitimate 
part of any real life strategy. Game Theory assumes that the game is a 
given - and the players have to optimize their results within it. It 
should open itself to the inclusion of game altering or redefining 
moves by the players as an integral part of their strategies. After 
all, games entail the existence of some agreement to play and this 
means that the players accept some rules (this is the role of the 
prosecutor in the Prisoners' Dilemma). If some outside rules (of the 
game) are permissible - why not allow the "risk" that all the players 
will agree to form an outside, lawfully binding, arbitration and 
enforcement agency - as part of the game? Such an agency will be 
nothing if not the embodiment, the materialization of one of the rules, 
a move in the players' strategies, leading them to more optimal or 
superior outcomes as far as their utility functions are concerned. 
Bargaining inevitably leads to an agreement regarding a decision making 
procedure. An outside agency, which enforces cooperation and some moral 
code, is such a decision making procedure. It is not an "outside" 
agency in the true, physical, sense. It does not "alter" the game (not 
to mention its rules). It IS the game, it is a procedure, a way to 
resolve conflicts, an integral part of any solution and imputation, the 
herald of cooperation, a representative of some of the will of all the 
players and, therefore, a part both of their utility functions and of 
their strategies to obtain their preferred outcomes. Really, these 
outside agencies ARE the desired outcomes. 

Once Game Theory digests this observation, it could tackle reality 
rather than its own idealized contraptions.


 Knowledge and Power 

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin 

"Knowledge is Power" goes the old German adage. But power, as any 
schoolboy knows, always has negative and positive sides to it. 
Information exhibits the same duality: properly provided, it is a 
positive power of unequalled strength. Improperly disseminated and 
presented, it is nothing short of destructive. The management of the 
structure, content, provision and dissemination of information is, 
therefore, of paramount importance to a nation, especially if it is in 
its infancy (as an independent state). 

Information has four dimensions and five axes of dissemination, some 
vertical and some horizontal. 

The four dimensions are: 

1. Structure - information can come in various physical forms and 
poured into different kinds of vessels and carriers. It can be 
continuous or segmented, cyclical (periodic) or punctuated, repetitive 
or new, etc. The structure often determines what of the information (if 
at all) will be remembered and how. It encompasses not only the mode of 
presentation, but also the modules and the rules of interaction between 
them (the hermeneutic principles, the rules of structural 
interpretation, which is the result of spatial, syntactic and 
grammatical conjunction). 

2. Content - This incorporates both ontological and epistemological 
elements. In other words: both "hard" data, which should, in principle, 
be verifiable through the employment of objective, scientific, methods 
- and "soft" data, the interpretation offered with the hard data. The 
soft data is a derivative of a "message", in the broader sense of the 
term. A message comprises both world-view (theory) and an action and 
direction-inducing element. 

3. Provision - The intentional input of structured content into 
information channels. The timing of this action, the quantities of data 
fed into the channels, their qualities - all are part of the equation 
of provision. 

4. Dissemination - More commonly known as media or information 
channels. The channels which bridge between the information providers 
and the information consumers. Some channels are merely technical and 
then the relevant things to discuss would be technical: bandwidth, 
noise to signal ratios and the like. Other channels are metaphorical 
and then the relevant determinants would be their effectiveness in 
conveying content to targeted consumers. 

 In the economic realm, there are five important axes of dissemination: 

1. >From Government to the Market - the Market here being the "Hidden 
Hand", the mechanism which allocates resources in adherence to market 
signals (for instance, in accordance with prices). 

The Government intervenes to correct market failures, or to influence 
the allocation of resources in favour or against the interests of a 
defined group of people. The more transparent and accountable the 
actions of the Government, the less distortion in the allocation of 
resources and the less resulting inefficiency. The Government should 
declare its intentions and actions in advance whenever possible, then 
it should act through public, open tenders, report often to regulatory 
and legislative bodies and to the public and so on. The more 
information provided by this major economic player (the most dominant 
in most countries) - the more smoothly and efficaciously the Market 
will operate. The converse, unfortunately, is also true. The less open 
the government, the more latent its intents, the more shadowy its 
operations - the more cumbersome the bureaucracy, the less functioning 
the market. 

2. From Government to the Firms - The same principles that apply to the 
desirable interaction between Government and Market, apply here. The 
Government should disseminate information to firms in its territory 
(and out of it) accurately, equitably and speedily. Any delay or 
distortion in the information, or preference of one recipient over 
another - will thwart the efficient allocation of economic resources.



3. From Government to the World - The "World" here being multilateral 
institutions, foreign governments, foreign investors, foreign 
competitors and the economic players in general providing that they are 
outside the territory of the information disseminating Government. 
Again, any delay, or abstention in the dissemination of information as 
well as its distortion (disinformation and misinformation) will result 
in economic outcomes worse that could have been achieved by a free, 
prompt, precise and equitable (=equally available) dissemination of 
said information. This is true even where commercial secrets are 
involved! It has been proven time and again that when commercial 
information is kept secret - the firm (or Government) that keeps it 
hidden is HARMED. The most famous examples are Apple (which kept its 
operating system a well-guarded secret) and IBM (which did not), 
Microsoft (which kept its operating system open to developers of 
software) and other software companies (which did not). Recently, 
Netscape has decided to provide its source code (the most important 
commercial secret of any software company) free of charge to 
application developers. Synergy based on openness seemed to have won 
over old habits. A free, unhampered, unbiased flow of information is a 
major point of attraction to foreign investors and a brawny point with 
the likes of the IMF and the World Bank. The former, for instance, 
lends money more easily to countries, which maintain a reasonably 
reliable outflow of national statistics. 

4. From Firms to the World - The virtues of corporate transparency and 
of the application of the properly revealing International Accounting 
Standards (IAS, GAAP, or others) need no evidencing. Today, it is 
virtually impossible to raise money, to export, to import, to form 
joint ventures, to obtain credits, or to otherwise collaborate 
internationally without the existence of full, unmitigated disclosure. 
The modern firm (if it wishes to interact globally) must open itself up 
completely and provide timely, full and accurate information to all. 
This is a legal must for public and listed firms the world over (though 
standards vary). Transparent accounting practices, clear ownership 
structure, available track record and historical performance records - 
are sine qua non in today's financing world. 

5. From Firms to Firms - This is really a subset of the previous axis 
of dissemination. Its distinction is that while the former is concerned 
with multilateral, international interactions - this axis is more 
inwardly oriented and deals with the goings-on between firms in the 
same territory. Here, the desirability of full disclosure is even 
stronger. A firm that fails to provide information about itself to 
firms on its turf, will likely fall prey to vicious rumours and 
informative manipulations by its competitors. 

Positive information is characterized by four qualities: 

1. Transparency - Knowing the sources of the information, the methods 
by which it was obtained, the confirmation that none of it was 
unnecessarily suppressed (some would argue that there is no "necessary 
suppression") - constitutes the main edifice of transparency. The datum 
or information can be true, but if it is not perceived to be 
transparent - it will not be considered reliable. Think about an 
anonymous (=non-transparent) letter versus a signed letter - the latter 
will be more readily relied upon (subject to the reliability of the 
author, of course). 

2. Reliability - is the direct result of transparency. Acquaintance 
with the source of information (including its history) and with the 
methods of its provision and dissemination will determine the level of 
reliability that we will attach to it. How balanced is it? Is the 
source prejudiced or in any way an interested, biased, party? Was the 
information "force-fed" by the Government, was the media coerced to 
publish it by a major advertiser, was the journalist arrested after the 
publication? The circumstances surrounding the datum are as important 
as its content. The context of a piece of information is of no less 
consequence that the information contained in it. Above all, to be 
judged reliable, the information must "reflect" reality. I mean 
reflection not in the basic sense: a one to one mapping of the 
reflected. I intend it more as a resonance, a vibration in tune with 
the piece of the real world that it relates to. 

People say: "This sounds true" and the word "sounds" should be 
emphasized. 

3. Comprehensiveness - Information will not be considered transparent, 
nor will it be judged reliable if it is partial. It must incorporate 
all the aspects of the world to which it relates, or else state 
explicitly what has been omitted and why (which is tantamount to 
including it, in the first place). A bit of information is embedded in 
a context and constantly interacts with it. Additionally, its various 
modules and content elements consistently and constantly interact with 
each other. A missing part implies ignorance of interactions and 
epiphenomena, which might crucially alter the interpretation of the 
information. Partiality renders information valueless. Needless to say, 
that I am talking about RELEVANT parts of the information. There are 
many other segments of it, which are omitted because their influence is 
negligible (the idealization process), or because it is so great that 
they are common knowledge. 

4. Organization - This, arguably, is the most important aspect of 
information. It is what makes information comprehensible. It includes 
the spatial and temporal (historic) context of the information, its 
interactions with its context, its inner interactions, as we described 
earlier, its structure, the rules of decision (grammar and syntax) and 
the rules of interpretation (semantics, etc.) to be applied. A 
worldview is provided, a theory into which the information fits. 
Embedded in this theory, it allows for predictions to be made in order 
to falsify the theory (or to prove it). Information cannot be 
understood in the absence of such a worldview. Such a worldview can be 
scientific, or religious - but it can also be ideological (Capitalism, 
Socialism), or related to an image which an entity wishes to project. 
An image is a theory about a person or a group of people. It is both 
supported by information - and supports it. It is a shorthand version 
of all the pertinent data, a stereotype in reverse. 

There is no difference in the application of these rules to information 
and to interpretation (which is really information that relates to 
other information instead of relating to the World). Both categories 
can be formal and informal. Formal information is information that 
designates itself as such (carries a sign: "I am information"). It 
includes official publications by various bodies (accountants, 
corporations, The Bureau of Statistics, news bulletins, all the media,