Zoological Illustrations,

OR

ORIGINAL FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS

OF

NEW, RARE, OR INTERESTING

ANIMALS,

SELECTED CHIEFLY FROM THE CLASSES OF

Ornithology, Entomology, and Conchology,

AND ARRANGED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF

CUVIER AND OTHER MODERN ZOOLOGISTS.



BY

WILLIAM SWAINSON, F.R.S., F.L.S.,

MEMBER OF THE WERNERIAN SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH, ETC.



VOL. I.



London:

PRINTED BY R. AND A. TAYLOR, SHOE-LANE:

FOR BALDWIN, CRADOCK, AND JOY, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
AND W. WOOD, STRAND.



1820-1.




PREFACE.



The termination of the first volume of the Zoological Illustrations is
accomplished, and its contents will not only enable our readers to discern
the nature of the work, but likewise to form a judgement, on that degree of
improvement which we have introduced since its first publication, and they
may safely rely on the continuation being in no respect inferior.

In commencing a work of this nature, we have had two principal objects in
view: the diffusion of original observations, which, while they might
further the ends of science, would also be interesting to the general
reader; and that of discouraging the publication of distorted figures
copied from old authors, by accustoming the public eye to original designs
and correct representations of natural objects. How far we may have
succeeded in this latter object, remains to be judged by others; we are
however satisfied with having made the attempt, and we hope that abler
pencils than our own, may engage in the prosecution of this most desirable
object; for it is only by the publication of original matter, that a check
can be given to the increasing number of compilations and multiplied copies
of "ill-shaped" figures, by which error is perpetuated, and science
retarded.

The only original work that has appeared in this country similar to our
own, is the Zoological Miscellany by Dr. Leach, which, as it was
discontinued after the third volume, it may be presumed was unsuccessful:
although little can be said of many of the figures in the early volumes,
those in the latter are much to be praised, and the whole are original; the
descriptions also abound with details highly interesting to the scientific
world, for which indeed the learned author principally intended it;
nevertheless it is a question, whether science in the end would not have
been equally, and perhaps more advanced, had this work been more adapted to
general readers. Instruction in these days of refinement must be made easy,
palatable, and enticing; the eye must be pleased, while the understanding
is improved, and Wisdom in her simple dignified garb will often be deserted
for Ignorance, decked out in the glittering trappings of Folly.

The _Naturalist's Miscellany_ conducted by Dr. Shaw, in its miscellaneous
nature also resembled the present work, and reached to the extent of
twenty-four volumes. What an invaluable fund of information these might
have contained had their contents been original! Unfortunately, however,
the exceptions are so few, that the whole may be termed a loose
compilation, the descriptions being mostly given in as few words as
possible, and the figures not only copied from wretched representations
found in old authors, but often coloured from their descriptions only! It
is indeed lamentable that the Author, whose talents and abilities were
unquestionable, should have exerted them so little, and thus have descended
to the rank of a voluminous compiler, for little better can be said of the
General Zoology, begun and continued under his name: little original matter
can there be found, excepting in the latter volumes, yet even in these no
notice whatever is taken of the immense number of new species discovered in
Africa by Le Vaillant, and long ago published in the _Oiseaux d'Afrique_:
the engravings also are in like manner copied from old prints, enlarged or
diminished as occasion offers, without even a regard to the selection of
the best. It may be as well to observe in this place, that a great number
of generic distinctions have been made in the two last volumes; which, as
they have not been followed by any of the great and acknowledged Zoologists
on the Continent, and appear to us in many instances trivial and
unnecessary, will not be adopted in this work.

It will be unnecessary to point out with regard to the scientific
arrangement, that we have avowedly adopted the principles of the modern
classification; which the strict followers of Linnaeus (in this country
alone) have so long, but so ineffectually opposed. The first has been
designated as the natural, and the other the artificial system; and,
without entering into a critical disquisition on these definitions, it will
be sufficient to observe, that by the Artificial System we bend nature to
conform to certain arbitrary principles, which we lay down and to which we
insist all her productions known and unknown will conform; while in the
Natural method, we endeavour by tracing her modifications, to adapt our
system to that which appears to regulate her operations. In the one we give
laws, in the other receive them; by the first we are taught to believe that
the highest attainment of the science, is that of ascertaining the name of
an object in our Museum, or of giving a new one; we record it in our
favourite system as a grammarian enters a new word in his dictionary, and
there the matter terminates. Where the artificial system ends, the natural
begins; for we then proceed to the investigation of affinities founded on
anatomical construction, economy, and geographic distribution; our
attention ceases to be confined to individuals, and extends to large
groups; general facts enable us to draw general conclusions, till the mind
begins faintly to discern a vast and mighty plan, by which the zones of the
earth are peopled by their own respective races of animate beings; blending
their confines unto each other with divine harmony, beauty, and usefulness.

That these inquiries and results have had a most wonderful effect on the
natural sciences of late years, is abundantly evident. Geology, a subject
hardly thought of in this country a few years ago, is now found to be a
science of the first importance; with this, however, Conchology is so
intimately connected, that without a certain knowledge of it, the geologist
is frequently unable to prosecute inquiries of the most interesting nature;
and there is little doubt but that Botany has been raised to the rank it
now so justly holds, solely because its natural system has been more
generally studied and advocated in this country, than that of any other
branch of Natural History. In this science at least, we possess a
superiority which our continental neighbours cannot dispute; and the name
of Brown will be enrolled in the brightest page of our philosophic
inquirers.

That the prejudiced adherence to the strict Linnaean system, has been the
primary cause why Zoology has been more neglected with us than on the
Continent, will admit of little doubt; for by shutting the door to all
further improvement, it has impressed the generality of our countrymen with
an idea, that the highest object of the Naturalist was to label the
contents of a museum, and to arrange stuffed animals, like quaint patterns
of old china, in glass cases: to thinking minds no less than to the vulgar,
this idea has produced a feeling of contempt and ridicule, and very few of
those qualified by nature for accurate investigation and philosophic
reasoning, have been induced to make the science a study; and thus from
such an unfortunate prejudice, to use the words of a powerful writer of the
present day, "some future historian of the progress of human knowledge,
will have to state that England, till within the few last years, stood
still at the bottom of the steps where Linnaeus had left her; while her
neighbours were advancing rapidly towards the entrance of the temple[1]."

Finally--Linnaeus to a comprehensive genius united indefatigable industry;
yet he could not see and study those innumerable productions that have been
discovered since his death: in proportion as our knowledge of objects
increases, so must our systems change, until the natural one is fully
developed; and the question simply comes to this, Whether the Linnaean
method should be upheld as a solitary exception to the mutability of human
wisdom.

The sun of truth must however finally prevail, and there is every reason to
think it has already broke, and will gradually disperse these mists of
prejudice. It is however much to be regretted, that our public institutions
are wholly inadequate to facilitate not only the advancement of students,
but the researches of those who are already engaged in prosecuting their
inquiries: in Scotland alone are founded any Professorships of Natural
History, and the establishment of our National Museum (in this branch only)
is confessedly difficult: materials for study are more necessary in this
science than any other; yet the public Institutions and libraries of the
metropolis, "rich and rare" in every other department of knowledge, in most
instances are deficient in this of the most elementary books; setting aside
those of illustration, which, from being unavoidably expensive and within
the reach of few purchasers, are more particularly adapted for such general
repositories of learning. The protracted ill-health of its noble possessor,
was the cause no doubt of the Banksian magnificent library being left
deficient in several of the latest continental works; and that of the
British Museum I have reason to think is still more defective. To the
honour however of the keepers of the Bodleian and Radcliffe Libraries, it
should be mentioned, that no pains or expense have been spared to render
them as perfect in this branch as possible; and we have been told that the
latter particularly is the most magnificent in the kingdom.

We shall now as briefly as possible advert to the contents of this volume.

In the Ornithological department the systems of Cuvier and Temminck have
mostly superseded all others: as a whole, we give a decided preference to
the latter, as being more natural, though it may be doubted if the generic
distinctions are not too few, while those of Cuvier are too many: both
however can be considered only as sketches, subject to improvement--as
natural affinities are more studied.

Regarding that part of our work which relates to Entomology, we have given
a decided preference to the Lepidoptera, for the simple reason that this
order has received less attention from all writers, concerning their real
characters and affinities, than any other; indeed they have been most
unaccountably neglected even by Latreille, the great founder of the modern
school: we have therefore thought it necessary to propose in this
department many new genera, and only have to regret that their definitions
could not be made more perfect without the destruction of the specimens,
frequently not our own, and which therefore was unattainable: a more
extended knowledge of the natural affinities existing in this tribe, will
alone confirm or annul the propriety of these distinctions.

In _Conchology_ many of the genera long established on the Continent, but
new to our own collectors, have been characterized and illustrated, as well
as specific distinctions defined between shells hitherto considered as
varieties; and here it must be observed that so much latitude has been
given to the meaning of the term _variety_, that in its general acceptation
its definition becomes impossible: our own idea of its true meaning is, a
shell possessing one or more characters which are changeable and uncertain,
and which consequently will not serve as indications by which it may
infallibly be distinguished from all others; _variety_ depends on local
circumstances, and affects the size, colour, and greater or less
development of the same modification of structure; a _species_ is
permanent, its structure always the same though more or less developed,
producing and perpetuating its kind, and depending on formation,
discernible in youth, and matured in age: we cannot therefore comprehend
the contradictory term of _permanent varieties_ in a state of nature
(though such occur in domesticated animals), which some authors have used,
and which has led to, in many instances, the most erroneous conclusions.

It is lamentable to see the opposition which is still made by our own
writers against all the modern improvements; yet although Linnaean
Introductions to Conchology are constantly issuing from the press, the
desire of being acquainted with a more natural and intelligible
classification has already appeared; and as we are frequently questioned on
the subject, we cannot in this place do better than refer the young student
to the valuable article on Conchology contained in the late supplement to
the _Encyclopedia Britannica_, the perusal of which will convey more solid
information, and less perplexity, than all the Introductions our
booksellers can boast of.

With respect to the quotations or synonyms, it should be observed that we
have in most instances limited them only to original works, all doubtful
ones have been rejected, and such only given as have been actually
consulted; indeed to this latter cause must be attributed the occasional
omission of some, existing in books we had not the immediate power of
consulting; our own library is not small; but the difficulty and expense of
procuring all the new continental publications, and the impossibility of
meeting with them at our public libraries[2], may have sometimes led us
into error, and unintentionally to have passed over the discoveries of
others.

With the few additions contained in the Appendix we shall now conclude;
trusting that in the remarks drawn from us by the present state of the
science in this country, our zeal for truth will not give us an appearance
of want of candour or of vanity. The truth of our remarks on the labours of
others, every one at all acquainted with the subject can inquire into, and
either acknowledge or disprove: we neither deprecate nor despise criticism:
an author who presumes to instruct others, should have his pretensions
publicly canvassed, his merits admitted, or his deficiency exposed; no one
is more sensible than we are that our own pretensions chiefly consist in
having set an example for others more able to follow: and if we have in any
way advocated the cause of truth and science, our object will be attained,
and we shall then gladly retire in the shade.

  LONDON,
  Sept. 15, 1821.




LIST OF BOOKS REFERRED TO.

    _Bruguire, Encycl. Meth._ Histoire Naturelle des Vers, par M. Bruguire,
    1 vol. 4to. and 4 vols. of Plates, forming part 10, 19, 21, 23, of the
    "Encyclopedie Methodique." Paris, 1789-1792.

    _Bloch._ Histoire Naturelle des Poissons, en 6 parties, 8vo. Berlin,
    1796.

    _Cramer._ Papillons Exotiques, 4 vols. 4to. Amsterdam, 1779-1782.

    _Cuvier._ Le Regne Animal, 4 vols. 8vo. Paris, 1817.

    _Chemnitz, Martini._ Neus Systematisches Conchylein Cabinet, 11 vols.
    Nurnburg, 1781-1795.

    _Dill._ A Descriptive Catalogue of Recent Shells. By F. W. Dillwyn, 2
    vols. 8vo. London, 1817.

    _Edwards._ A Natural History of uncommon Birds, &c.; and Gleanings of
    Natural History. By G. Edwards, 7 vols. 4to. 1763, &c.

    _Fab. Ent. Syst._ Entomologia Systematica, emendata et aucta. J. C.
    Fabricius, 4 vols. 4to. Hafnia, 1792-1794.

    _Gen. Zool._ General Zoology, commenced by Dr. Shaw, and continued by
    Mr. Stevens, 11 vols. 8vo. to 1819.

    _Gmelin Linn. Syst. Nat._ C. Linne Systema Naturae. Cura J. F. Gmelin.
    Lipsiae, 1788-1793.

    _Godart in Encycl. Method._ Encyclopedie Methodique, t. 9. p. 1. 1819.

    _Gualtieri._ Index Testarum Conchyliorum quae adservantur in Musaeo N.
    Gualtieri. Florentiae, 1742.

    _Illiger._ Prod. Systematis Mammalium et Avium, 8vo. Berolini, 1811.

    _Knorr._ Les Delices des Yeux et de l'Esprit, 6 P., 4to. Nuremb. 1760,
    &c.

    _Klein Hist. Pisc._ Historiae Nat. Piscium promovendae Missus, 6, 4to.
    Dantzic, 1740-49.

    _Linn. Syst. Nat._ See Gmelin.

    _Linn. Trans._ Transactions of the Linnean Society of London, 13 vols.
    4to. 1791-1821.

    _Lister._ M. Lister Historia Conchyliorum, folio. Oxonii, 1770.

    _Lamarck Syst._ Hist. Nat. des Animaux sans Vertebres. Par le Chevalier
    de Lamarck, 6 vols. 8vo. Paris, 1815-1819.

    ---- _Anal. Mus._ Annales du Museum d'Histoire Naturelle de Paris, 4to.
    1802-1821.

    _Lath. Synop. Suppl._ A General Synopsis of Birds. By Dr. J. Latham, 3
    vols, and 2 Supplements, 4to. London, 1782, &c.

    ---- _Index Ornith._ Index Ornithologicus, 2 vols. 4to. London, 1790.

    _Martyn Univ. Conch._ The Universal Conchologist. By T. Martyn, 4 vols.
    4to. London, 1784, &c.

    _Martini._ See Chemnitz.

    _Pennant._ British Zoology. By T. Pennant, 4 vols. 8vo. London, 1812.

    _Risso Icth._ Ichtyologie de Nice, 1 vol. 8vo. Paris, 1810.

    _Rumph._ Thesaurium Imaginum Piscium, &c., folio. Hagae, 1739.

    _Seba._ Albertus Seba Rerum Naturalium Thesauri, 4 vols. folio.
    Amsterdam, 1734-1765.

    _Say._ Description of the Land and Fresh-water Shells of the United
    States. By Thomas Say. Philadelphia, 1819.

    _Shaw in Gen. Zool._ See General Zoology.

    _Temminck Pig. et Gall._ Histoire Naturelle Generale des Pigeons et des
    Gallinaces. Par C. J. Temminck, 2 vols. 8vo. Amst. 1813.

    ---- _Manuel._ Manuel d'Ornithologie, 2d edit., 2 vols. 8vo. 1820.

    _Le Vaill._ Hist. Nat. des Toucans et des Barbus, folio. Paris, 1806.

    ---- Hist. Nat. des Perroquets, 2 vols. folio. Paris, 1801.

    _White's Voyage._ Journal of a Voyage to N. S. Wales, 4to. Lond. 1790.




Pl. 1

[Illustration]

PSITTACUS Cayennensis.

_Cayenne gold-winged Parakeet._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum breve, crassum, validissimum, ad basin cute tectum; mandibula
    superiore adunca; inferiore sub-recurvata, breviore. Nares rotundae,
    nudae, ferme verticales. Pedes scansorii._

    Bill short, thick, very strong, covered at the base by a cere; upper
    mandible sharply hooked; under mandible obtuse, curving upwards, and
    much shorter. Nostrils round, naked, nearly vertical. Feet scansorial.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _P. viridis, alis spuriis aurantiis, remigibus exterioribus basi
    caeruleis, cauda brevi cuneata._

    Green Parakeet, with the spurious wings golden-orange: outer quills
    blue at their base. Tail short, wedged.

    Le Perruche a tache souci. _Le Vaill. pl._ 58, 59. _p._ 169.



We only thoroughly identified this beautiful little bird, by an inspection
of the costly work of Le Vaillant on this family, in the Banksian Library:
for the description of the orange-winged Parakeet of Dr. Latham is not
applicable; and Dr. Shaw has persisted in the old error of considering this
species a variety of the Toui Parakeet, although the question had been put
at rest by the original description and sound reasons of Le Vaillant. There
is a wide difference between naturalists who compile, and form their
theories from books, and those who study nature, and think for themselves;
and nothing will result from the first but mischief to the science, and
perplexity to the student.

Our figure is from a specimen brought from Demerara by C. Edmonston, Esq.;
another is in the possession of A. MacLeay, Esq. Though rare in our
cabinets, M. Le Vaillant says it is common in Cayenne. He has given a
beautiful figure of the female, which is entirely green.

Total length six inches. Plumage above entirely green, beneath paler and
inclining to yellow; just under the lower mandible is a small
snuff-coloured spot, and a very narrow line of the same in front just above
the nostrils; the quills dark-green, the greater ones on their outside base
are blue, with which the head is also tinged. The spurious wings are
entirely of a rich and clear orange. Inner wing-covers green. Quills inside
greenish-blue, except on each side the shafts, where there is a line of
black. Tail short, cuneated, hardly projecting an inch beyond the wings,
both above and below green: the interior margin dirty-yellow, the feathers
pointed. Bill and legs flesh-colour.




Pl. 2

[Illustration]

SITTA frontalis.

_Blue Nuthatch._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum rectissimum, acutum, compressum; utroque mandibulo ad apicem
    aeque inclinato; apice integro cuneo compresso simili. Nares basales,
    ovales, apertae, plumis setaceis incumbentibus extrinsecus tectae.
    Pedes tribus digitis anticis; uno postico; digitus interior minimus;
    exterior ad basin medio connexus; hallux productus validus. Ungues
    compressissimi; antici subaequales; posticus maximus. Cauda brevis,
    rectricibus duodecim subaequalibus._

Typus Genericus _S. Europaea_.

    Bill very straight, sharp-pointed, compressed; both mandibles equally
    inclining to the tip, which is entire, and resembles a compressed
    wedge. Nostrils basal, oval, open, covered externally with incumbent
    setaceous feathers. Feet with three toes forward and one backward;
    inner toe very small; outer toe connected to the middle at its base;
    hind toe lengthened, strong. Claws much compressed; anterior nearly
    equal, posterior largest. Tail short, of twelve nearly equal feathers.

Generic Type _Sitta Europaea_.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _S. supra caerulea; supercilio, fronte, et remigibus lateralibus in
    medio nigris; subtus cinereo-fusca, auribus lilacinis, mento albo._

    Nuthatch, above blue: line above the eye, front, and middle of the
    lateral tail-feathers black; beneath cinereous brown, ears lilac, chin
    white.

    ...



The present species is one of the many interesting birds collected in Java
by my friend Dr. Horsfield: it was not, however, until I had described and
engraved another specimen, sent to Sir J. Banks from Ceylon, that I
discovered the species had already been included in the Doctor's account of
the birds of Java, presented to the Linnaean Society, where he has
described it under the name of _Orthorynchus frontalis_.

The specific name of its first describer is of course retained: with
respect, however, to its generic situation, I must be allowed to dissent
from considering it as a distinct genus, merely from the prolongation of
the hinder toe being somewhat more developed than in _Sitta Europaea_ and
_Carolinensis_, both which birds are now before me, and which in themselves
differ in the relative proportion of this part: thus in _S. Carolinensis_
the hind toe and claw is two-tenths of an inch shorter than the leg; in _S.
Europaea_ it is one-tenth shorter; and in the present species it just
exceeds that of the leg: in every other respect not the slightest
difference I apprehend will be observed ....

Total length five inches. Size of the European Nuthatch. Bill, from the
angle of the mouth to the tip, eight lines; front of the head velvet-black,
continued in a stripe of the same colour over the eye, and terminating
above the ear feathers: the upper plumage is of a rich blue, more brilliant
on the head, and paler on the front, and external margins of the quills.
Spurious wings and lesser quills black margined with blue. Inner
wing-covers deep black; the under plumage is a light-brown, changing to
lilac on the ears and sides of the neck, and tinged with cinereous on the
flanks and vent: the chin is white; tail even, the two middle feathers
blue, the rest more or less black, having the external margins and tips
blue. The outer quill of the wings is short, the second and third longest
and equal, the fourth rather less; the hind toe with the claw, measures one
inch in a straight line.




Pl. 3

[Illustration]

MITRA zonata.

_Zoned Mitre._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Testa inaequaliter fusiformis, spira producta attenuata, labio
    exteriore intus edentulo. Columella plicata._

    Shell unequally fusiform. Spire lengthened, attenuated. Outer lip
    simple, not toothed within. Columella plaited.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _M. epidermide lutea, fulvo-marmorata, anfractibus inferne basi nigris,
    columella quinque-plicata. Linn. Trans. xii. p. 338._

    Mitre, with the epidermis marbled with brownish-yellow; volutions at
    their base black; columella five-plaited.

    Mitra zonata. _Marryat in Linn. Trans. vol._ xii. _pl._ 10. _fig._ 1.
    2.



This unique and beautiful Mitre has been already described by Captain
Marryat in the Linnaean Transactions: the figures, however, are uncoloured,
and give a very indifferent idea of the graceful symmetry of its form. My
friend Dr. Leach, with his usual liberality, permitted me to draw the
accompanying figure of it at the British Museum, where it is now deposited.

It appears to have been taken near Nice in the Mediterranean, adhering to a
sounding-line, in very deep water; a very singular locality, since nearly
all the Mitres have generally been supposed to inhabit the tropical seas,
or at least far from the coasts of Europe. It should, however, be remarked,
that _Cypraea lurida_, an Asiatic shell, I have found on the shores of
Greece: and C. Ulysses, in his travels in the kingdom of Naples, enumerates
several shells as inhabiting the warm shores of the Tarentine Bay, which
are generally known only as natives of the Red Sea and Indian Ocean. These
facts, with many others, prove the physical distribution of _Molluscae_ to
be less decidedly marked than almost any other class of animals.

This genus is included with that of _Voluta_ by Linnaeus and our own
writers, although long ago justly separated by the continental zoologists.




Pl. 4

[Illustration]

BULIMUS melastomus.

_Blackmouthed Bulimus._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Testa ovalis, vel oblongo-ovalis. Spira elevata. Os integrum,
    sub-ovale. Columella laevis, simplex. Labium externum crassum,
    reflexum. Internum ultra medium cavo-inflexum. Operculum nullum._

    Shell oval or oblong-oval. Spire elevated. Mouth entire, sub-oval.
    Column smooth, simple. Exterior lip thick, reflected. Interior lip
    beyond the middle inflected, and hollowed beneath. Operculum none.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _B. testa oblongo-ovata, alba, cinereo marmorata, spirae anfractibus
    longitudinaliter plicatis, labio exteriore complanato; apertura nigra._

    Shell oblong-ovate, white, marbled with cinereous. Spiral whorls
    longitudinally plaited. Outer lip flattened; aperture black.



The genus _Bulimus_ was long ago formed by Scopoli out of the heterogeneous
mixture of shells thrown together in the Linnaean genus _Helix_[3], &c.: it
comprehends some of the larger and most beautiful of the exotic land
shells, among which the present species will stand conspicuous both in
beauty of colouring and excessive rarity. While travelling among the
forests of Brazil, in the province of Bahia, I found the shell here figured
one morning on the leaves of a _Solanum_. I not only searched myself, but
promised as a reward to any of my Indians who would bring me another, a
two-bladed Birmingham knife!--the greatest temptation they could have!--but
in vain; for I never saw another before or since.

There are many peculiar characters presented in this species independent of
its colour: the spiral whorls are strongly plaited longitudinally about
half their length, and marked very slightly (but sufficiently distinct)
with several oblique indented striae; the principal whorl has a row of
indented and unequal sulcations near the suture, and a slight appearance of
elevation along the white transverse band; the outer lip is thick, broad,
and flattened beneath; but the margin is reflected back, and forms a
prominent rim on the upper surface. The shell, when viewed closely, appears
rough with minute scale-like elevations, very much resembling shagreen.




Pl. 5

[Illustration]

COLIAS Statira.



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Palpi breves, curvati, compressi ad linguam, squamis dense tecti.
    Articulis tribus; primo longissimo, ad basin curvato, ultra erecto;
    secundo erecto, brevi; tertio minimo, proclivi; apice nudo, obtuso.
    Antennae breves, cylindraceae, ad apicem nudum et abrupte truncatum
    sensim incrassatae. Alae anteriores trigonae. Abdomen maris, ultimo
    articulo acuto, et subtus tenui unco incurvato; valvis magnis,
    attenuatis, aduncis._

Typus Genericus _Colias Ebule._

    Palpi short, curved, compressed on the tongue, thickly covered with
    scales. Articulations three; the first very long, curved at the base,
    erect beyond; the second erect, short; the third minute, inclining
    forward; the tip naked, obtuse. Antennae short, cylindric, gradually
    thickening to their tip, which is naked and abruptly truncate. Anterior
    wings trigonal. Abdomen of the male with the last joint pointed, and a
    slender incurved hook beneath; the valves large, attenuated and hooked.

Generic Type _Colias Ebule_.



    SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _C. alis dilute flavis, vel fulvis; anticis supra, puncto medio
    margineque extimo, nigris; subtus ferrugineis; posticis subtus,
    singulis duobus niveis punctis inaequalibus; palpis productis._

    Wings diluted yellow or fulvous; anterior with a black border and
    central dot, which beneath is ferrugineous; posterior beneath, each
    with two unequal snowy spots; palpi lengthened.--_Female._

    Papilio Statira. _Cramer, pl._ cxx. _fig._ C. D.



The present insect is selected to illustrate a very elegant family of
Butterflies, whose predominant tints are composed of orange, yellow, and
white, variously blended and disposed in a greater or less degree
throughout all the species. The generic characters above given will
distinguish them as peculiar to the tropics, and principally those of South
America; one or two species only being found in Africa, and five or six
inhabiting India.

I have no doubt this is the _Pap. Statira_ of Cramer; it is found only in
Brazil, and has been erroneously considered by Godart and Latreille as a
variety of _C. Jugurthina_, an Indian insect, and which in fact is not in
itself a species, being no other than the female of _C. Alcmeone_, as an
attentive examination of a vast number of both, collected in Java by Dr.
Horsfield, enabled me to ascertain.

The extraordinary prolongation of the last joint of the palpi, and the
white borderless spots beneath, which are never silvered, will distinguish
this species through all the variations; in the ground colour of its wings,
which in no two specimens are exactly alike, and one before me is nearly
white; the lesser snowy dot is sometimes very obscure, and often wanting;
but the prolongation of the palpi is even expressed in Cramer's figure
above quoted.

I have examined about a dozen specimens, mostly captured by myself, and all
have been females; and I strongly suspect future and more decided
observations will prove _C. Evadne_ to be the other sex: it has the palpi
lengthened, though in a less degree; and the articulations of the antennae
in both insects will be found somewhat thickened at their termination when
viewed under a magnifier, a peculiarity I have seen in no other species;
and although I have examined near thirty specimens of _C. Evadne_, they
have invariably proved to be males.

The palpi in this insect will be found at variance with the generic
character now given; a striking proof that in a natural system no single
part can be taken as an unerring criterion for generic distinction, without
making it eventually an artificial one. The _Colias Drya_ of Fabricius has
the same formation of palpi, but is a totally different insect.




Pl. 6

[Illustration]

COLIAS Leachiana.

_Leachian Colias._



GENERIC CHARACTER.--See Pl. 5.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _C. alis subrotundatis, integris, virescenti-albidis, anticis supra
    fulvis, margine punctoque medio nigris, singulis subtus macula centrali
    ferruginea._ Encycl. Method.

    (Male) wings slightly rounded, entire, greenish white; anterior pair
    above orange, at their tips, margin, and central dot black: each pair
    beneath with a central ferrugineous spot. Female ----?

    C. Leachiana. _Godart in Encycl. Method._ vol. ix. p. 91.



In size this insect is the largest of the genus yet discovered; it was
first noticed by Godart, who has given it the name of my learned and valued
friend, Dr. W. E. Leach, of the British Museum, whose talents are too well
known to need any eulogium in this place.

It appears to inhabit both the northern and southern extremities of Brazil;
for I have seen it in a box sent from Para, and my specimens were captured
in Minas Geraes by my friend Dr. Langsdorff. It is, however, a rare
species; for I have only seen seven or eight specimens, and they were all
males: the female, when found, will probably differ as remarkably as in
most of this genus.

The opaque spot on the inferior wings above is very large; but the tuft of
hair corresponding beneath the superior wings, is entirely wanting. It
should be likewise observed, that although this insect in every outward
respect resembles a genuine _Colias_ (the type of which may be _C. Ebule_),
it differs very materially in the terminal appendages of the abdomen; the
last joint being the shortest, and scarcely pointed; and the hook, instead
of being concealed beneath this segment, is exserted beyond it, and met by
two others, one at the base of each lateral valve: these valves are also
much shorter, ovate, and not attenuated, although ending in an incurved
hook. In the present ignorance in which a true knowledge of the Lepidoptera
is involved, it is impossible to say how far these dissimilarities may
point out natural groups; it is therefore of the highest importance to the
science such facts should be noticed.




Pl. 7

[Illustration]

CARDUELIS cucullata.

_Hooded Seed-eater._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum breve, validum, conicum, rectissimum; mandibulis
    subaequalibus; apice immarginato, recto, acuto; mandibula superiore
    culmine convexa; inferiore basi marginis angulata, utrinque subtusque
    convexa._

Typus Genericus _Fringilla Canaria_. Lath., &c.

    Bill short, stout, very conic, without any curvature above; both
    mandibles nearly equal, the tip entire, straight and sharp; upper
    mandible convex above: lower one at the base of the margin with an
    obtuse angle, the sides and under part convex.

Generic Type _Fringilla Canaria_. Latham, &c.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _C. aurantia: capite, gutture, fascia trans tectrices, remigibus
    caudaque nigris; remigibus primoribus basi oblique aurantio fasciatis._

    Orange: head, front of the neck, bar across the wing-covers, quills and
    tail black; greater quills at their base obliquely barred with orange.



A richly coloured little bird, much smaller than our Goldfinch, and
approaching very near to the _Bouvreuil de Bourbon_ of Buffon, from which,
however, I think it quite distinct. The only one I have yet seen is in the
possession of E. Falkner, Esq. of Fairfield near Liverpool, who received it
with a few other rare birds from the Spanish Main.

Total length four inches. Bill blackish and very sharp. The whole head and
forepart of the neck is black. The plumage of the body is a fine
reddish-orange, duller on the back and brightest beneath: wing-covers the
same; the greater ones at their base black, which forms a bar: the quills
are also black, the greater ones having at their base an oblique bar of
orange, and some of the lesser ones slightly margined externally with
white. Tail divaricated and black; some of the lateral feathers faintly
margined with orange. Spurious wings black. Legs and claws brown.

The _Bouvreuil de Bourbon_, and the _B. du Cap de Bonne Esperance_ of
Buffon (_Pl. Enl. pl._ 204. _fig._ 1, 2.) appear to have been described as
the different sexes of one bird (the Orange Grossbeak of Latham) on mere
conjecture. I think them quite distinct, inhabiting different countries,
and having all the appearance (in the figures) of being two male birds; for
the females in this family seldom possess the rich colours of the male; and
the figure of the last of these birds, has not the slightest habit of a
female.

The present genus was formed by Cuvier, (though but very slightly defined,)
and includes the common Goldfinch and Canary-bird.




Pl. 8

[Illustration]

MEROPS urica.

_Javanese Bee-eater._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum productum, laeve, subcurvatum, compressum; apice acuto, basi
    trigono; culmine carinato. Pedes brevissimi, gressorii. Alae
    attenuatae._

Typus Genericus _M. apiaster_. Linn., &c.

    Bill lengthened, smooth, slightly curved, terminating in a sharp point;
    the base triangular, the sides much compressed, the back carinated.
    Feet very short, gressorial. Wings pointed.

Generic Type _Merops apiaster_. Linn., &c.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _M. viridis, infra pallidior; capite, collo supra rufo; mento, jugulo,
    sulphureis; linea temporali et torque colli nigris; tegminibus
    uropygioque caeruleis; cauda subfurcata._

    Green, beneath paler. Head and neck above rufous; chin and throat
    sulphur; line under the eyes, and collar round the neck, black.
    Tail-covers and rump pale blue. Tail slightly forked.

    Merops urica. _Horsfield in Linn. Trans._



The true Bee-eaters are confined to the old world, principally inhabiting
Africa and Asia; one species only, the European Bee-eater, being known with
any degree of certainty to be found in Europe; and this is occasionally
seen in England. They are all gregarious, feeding on the wing, and in
general migratory.

Most unwillingly I have again in this instance anticipated my friend Dr.
Horsfield in describing this bird, which he found in Java, and which I
engraved after one sent from Ceylon, without knowing it had also fallen
under his observation.

The figure is less than the natural size, which is nearly that of our
European species. Bill an inch and a half long from the gape, and black.
Nostrils small, basal, round, not sulcated, partially defended by incumbent
hairs; at the angle of the mouth is a row of short, stiff bristles; a black
line commences from the nostrils, passes under the eye, and terminates with
the ears. The upper part of the head, neck, and between the wings, rufous.
The rump and upper tail-covers pale blue: the chin and throat sulphur
tinged with rufous, where an irregular and narrow collar of black crosses
the neck. The remaining under parts yellowish-green. Wings and quills
fulvous green, the latter tipt with black, and all the inner shafts more or
less rufous: the second quill longest, and the lesser quills and
tail-feathers notched at their tips. Tail green, slightly forked; the tips
and under side dusky-black, and three inches and a half long. Wings, when
closed, four inches one line in length. Vent blueish-white.

The females in this genus may generally be distinguished by the two middle
tail-feathers being but slightly or not at all elongated.




Pl. 9

[Illustration]

HELIX auriculata.

_Eared Helix._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Testa orbicularis vel globosa. Spira depressa vel paululum elevata.
    Apertura integra. Labium exterius marginatum. Operculum nullum._

    Shell orbicular or globose. Spire depressed, or but slightly elevated.
    Aperture entire. Outer lip margined. Operculum, none.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _H. testa depressissima, ferrugineo-marmorata et bifasciata, umbilico
    magno, profundo, apertura auriformi; labio exteriore incrassato,
    margine interiore dente obsoleto._

    Shell much depressed, marbled and doubly-banded with ferrugineous.
    Umbilicus large, deep. Aperture ear-shaped. Outer lip thickened,
    reflected, with a gibbous obsolete tooth within.



A shell no less remarkable for its form than its extreme rarity. The mouth
bears a most striking resemblance to the human ear; and the only specimen
known in this country is the one here figured, from the cabinet of Ch.
Dubois, Esq., who obligingly favoured me with it for examination; neither
does the exquisite work on the Land Shells, by M. de Ferrusac, now
publishing at Paris, contain this species among the numerous matchless
figures already given of this family.

In the present uncertainty respecting the natural groups of the genus
_Helix_, as left by Lamarck, I have preferred for the present following the
example of Cuvier and de Ferrusac, in placing it with that family, in
preference to adopting the ill-defined and palpably artificial distribution
of them by D. de Montfort, or of forming a new genus for its reception.

The variegations in its colouring are better seen in the figures than
described. The whole shell is slightly marked with obsolete longitudinal
striae; the umbilicus is very deep, and the tooth does not extend
externally beyond the margin of the lip.




Pl. 10

[Illustration]

STROMBUS.



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Testa ventricosa; basis canali brevi, truncato vel emarginato; labium
    exterius simpliciter alatum, ala ad basin inferne emarginata; supra
    dilatata._

    _Animal marinum, carnivorum, trachelipodum; corpore spirali; pede
    compresso ad cervicis basin inferiorem._ Leach in Zool. Misc. vol. i.
    p. 51.

Typus Genericus _S. pugilis._ Linn.

    Shell ventricose; base with a short canal, which is either emarginate
    or truncate; external lip dilated into a simple wing, notched at the
    base, and prominent above.

    Animal marine, carnivorous; body spiral, with a compressed foot at the
    inferior base of the neck.

Generic Type _S. pugilis._ Linn.



STROMBUS minimus.

_Little Strombus--central figures._

    _S. testa nodose plicata; spira subtilissime striata; labio interiore
    reflecto, incrassato, supra obtuse-acuminato; exteriore intra laevi,
    supra alte-lobato, anfractui secundo spirali adjuncto._

    Shell with nodulous plaits; the spire finely striated; inner lip
    thickened and reflected, and obtusely pointed above. Outer lip smooth
    within, deeply lobed above, attached to the second spiral volution.

    _Lister_ 859. 15. _Chemnitz. tab._ 156. _fig._ 1491, 1492. _Rumph.
    tab._ 36, P. _Gualtieri, tab._ 32, G.

    Strombus marginatus. _Dillwyn's Cat._ p. 665. no. 18.



A pretty and diminutive species, scarcely ever more than one inch three
lines long. The spire long in proportion, and occupying half an inch: when
in perfection the colour is a deep chesnut, minutely broken into finely
serrated darker lines, with one, two, or three interrupted bands of white
on the body whorl, the spire, and margin of the outer lip paler; there are
two or three nodules above; and the spiral volutions have the carinated row
of tubercles usual in the _Strombi_, and are besides finely striated
transversely. The base of the shell is more deeply and distinctly striated;
both the lips are much thickened, tumid, white, and highly polished;
terminating above in obtuse points on the second spiral whorl, leaving a
narrow ascending channel between; the inside of the aperture is a fine
yellow.

Inhabits the Indian seas, but is not common.

By some unaccountable oversight, Mr. Dillwyn has very well described this
shell, but under the name and supposition of its being the _S. marginatus_
of Linnaeus; though a few pages after he brings all the true synonyms
referring to his shell, under a description purporting to be that of _S.
minimus_, but which in reality is more applicable to our next species. Why
this writer should doubt the correctness of Gmelin, Chemnitz, &c.
respecting the true _S. marginatus_ of Linnaeus, does not appear,
particularly as he has substituted for it a well known species. I have
little doubt myself they all mean one and the same shell, which is nothing
more than a scarce variety of _S. accinctus_, now before me, with which
Linnaeus's original description pretty well agrees.



STROMBUS variabilis.

_Variable Strombus--upper figure._

    _S. testa nodose plicata, spira striis nullis; labio interiore
    simplice, exteriore reflecto, intra laevi, supra leviter lobato._

    Shell with nodulous plaits, the spire not striated. Inner lip simple.
    Outer lip reflected, smooth within, and slightly lobed above.



Shell two inches and a quarter long, the spire occupying little more than
half an inch. The ground colour generally is white with numerous undulated
short lines of a darker colour, sometimes crossed by four or five obsolete
whitish bands: it approaches very near _S. minimus_, but is easily
distinguished by being in general much larger, by having the inner lip not
at all thickened above, the outer lip very slightly lobed, and only
advancing on the first volution of the spire: it varies, however, amazingly
in colour. There is a small variety, having a brown spot beneath, from
India; and others (labelled from the So. Seas) in the Banksian collection,
also small, are purplish-brown, with three or four well-defined bands of
white: the aperture is always pure white.




Pl. 11

[Illustration]

DRUSILLA Horsfieldii.



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Antennae mediocres, clava producta, gracili, cylindracea. Palpi
    breves, compressissimi, obtusi, remoti, linguam non attingentes;
    lateribus utrisque hirsutissimis, articulos obtegentibus. Abdomen (in
    maribus) 7-articulatum: 1mo longissimo, ultimo simplici, truncato,
    supra integro, subtus unco incurvato, valvis nullis. Alae anticae (in
    maribus) basi postica dilatatae, fasciculum in alas posticas
    obtegentes._

    (OBS. _Alae integerrimae, subdiaphanae, posticae magnae, orbiculares.
    Pedes antici spurii; antennarum articuli basales ad apicem
    incrassati._)

Typus Genericus _Papilio Jairus_. Fabr.

    Antennae moderate, the club lengthened, slender, cylindric. Palpi
    short, much compressed, obtuse, remote, not touching the tongue,
    covered equally on both sides with thickset hairs concealing the
    joints. Abdomen (in the male) 7-jointed, the first very long, the last
    simple, truncate, and entire above, without valves, and with an
    incurved hook beneath. Anterior wings (in the male) dilated at the
    posterior base, concealing a tuft of hair on the inferior wings.

Generic Type _Papilio Jairus_. Fabr.

    (OBS. Wings very entire, sub-diaphanous. Hinder wings large, orbicular.
    Fore-legs spurious. Basal articulations of the antennae thickened at
    the end.)



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _D. alis anticis angustatis, fuscis, concoloribus; margine posteriore
    et exteriore aequalibus: posticis albidis; margine exteriore fusco,
    supra uni-ocellato, subtus bi-ocellato._

    Wings, anterior, narrowed, the posterior and exterior margins equal,
    uniform brown; posterior cream-coloured, with a brown margin, one
    ocellate spot above, and two beneath.



This new and elegant insect was discovered by my worthy friend Dr.
Horsfield (after whom I have named it) in the interior of Java: it forms a
part of the extensive collections made there by this zealous naturalist for
the East India Company, and which will make a most important addition to
our present confined knowledge of the productions of that interesting
island: indeed these collections exceed in extent, preservation, and value,
any which have been brought to this country.

The general resemblance of this species with _Papilio Jairus_ of Fabricius
is so great, that it might pass on a cursory view as a mere variety, did
not the form of the anterior wings at once point out the difference. In the
present insect the posterior and exterior margins are of equal length,
giving a narrow appearance to the wings, much resembling some of the true
_Papilionidae_; but in _P. Jairus_, these wings are much broader, more
obtuse, and the length of the posterior margin much greater; other minor
differences exist in the colouring and markings. My valued friend A. H.
Haworth, Esq., F.L.S., &c. possesses a fine pair of the true _P. Jairus_ in
his rich and extensive collection; and the liberality with which it is
constantly and freely opened to me, deserves my warmest thanks.

From these two species I have formed the present genus, the characters of
which will distinguish it from that of _Haetera_ (Fabr.), a scanty genus
confined to South America; and this seems to occupy its place in India:
both will come in the natural family of _Hipparchidae_. Only one specimen
(a male) exists in Dr. Horsfield's collections; I could not therefore
dissect the mouth, &c. On the inner borders of the inferior wings is a
lengthened tuft of fine hairs: the _anus_ beneath has on each side an
obtuse lengthened process, partially attached, and which appears to supply
the place of the lateral valves. It is represented on a sprig of

GAERTNERA _racemosa_,

which, although differing slightly from the figure of Dr. Roxburgh's
Coromandel Plants, p. 19. t. 18, Dr. Horsfield considers as the same plant.
The Javanese name is _Kakas_.




Pl. 12

[Illustration]

GOBIUS Suerii.

_Suerian Goby._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Caput parvum. Oculi approximati. Pinnae dorsales duae, radiis
    flexilibus: ventrales conjunctae, infundibuliformes. Branchiarum
    apertura contracta, membrana 4-radiata._

Typus Genericus _Gobius niger_. Pennant.

    Head small. Eyes approximating. Dorsal fins two, the rays flexible.
    Ventral fins united into the form of a funnel. Gill aperture
    contracted, the membrane four-rayed.

Generic Type _Gobius niger_. Pennant.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _G. olivaceus, cauda atro-purpurea. Capite, operculis, pinna dorsali et
    caudali longitudinaliter flavo-lineatis._

    Olivaceous Goby. Tail obscure purple. Head, gills, dorsal and caudal
    fins with yellow longitudinal lines.

    Gobius Suerii. _Risso Icth. p._ 387. _pl._ 11. _fig._ 43.



This beautiful little fish never exceeds the size here represented. It is
not uncommon on the coast of Sicily in the spring months: it has likewise
been discovered on the shores of Nice by Risso, who is its first describer:
his figure, however, is so remarkably bad, that it would be impossible to
recognise it but for his description: in fact, the fish is so delicate,
that unless the fins are very carefully expanded in water their form and
colouring will never be seen correctly. It has been named after M. C. A. Le
Sueur (who accompanied Peron in the French circumnavigation), an able
zoologist and most inimitable draftsman and engraver.

General colour pale olivaceous yellow, with a few obscure large spots along
the body somewhat brighter. The head has four yellow oblique bands, between
which, and behind the eye, is a bright blue spot. Ventral fins blackish.
The first dorsal fin is trigonal, and has the third ray lengthened and
longest; the three last rays tipt with deep-black; the second fin is
lengthened, broadest at the end, the membrane greyish-white with narrow
longitudinal lines of yellow. Caudal fin lanceolate, pointed,
blackish-purple, margined and marked with yellow lines parallel with the
borders. Pectoral fin ovately rounded, with faint yellow transverse bands.
Anal fin resembling the second dorsal, greyish, with the margin
dull-purple. Scales large, very deciduous; lateral line invisible; lower
jaw longest; teeth minute. Body and fins semi-transparent. The first dorsal
fin has seven rays; the second fifteen; anal fifteen; pectoral twelve;
caudal seventeen; ventral fourteen.




Pl. 13

[Illustration]

PLATYRHYNCHUS Ceylonensis.

_Ceylonese Flat-bill._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum breve, rectum, depressissimum, ferme trigonum; mandibula
    superiore ad apicem abrupte adunca, emarginata; inferiore recta,
    breviore; marginibus superioris inferiorem superplicantibus. Os et
    Nares longis rigidis vibrissis obtectae. Nares, mediae inter apicem et
    hiatum rostri. Cauda plerumque aequalis, rectricibus duodecim. Pedes et
    Tarsi breves, graciles._

    Typi Generici. Div. I. _Todus Platyrhynchos._ Gm. Div. II. _Muscicapa
    barbata._ Lath.

    Bill short, straight, thin, very depressed, and nearly triangular; the
    upper mandible abruptly hooked at the tip, and notched; the margins
    folding over those of the under mandible, which is straight and
    shorter. Mouth and nostrils defended by long stiff bristles. Nostrils
    medial between the tip and gape of the bill. Tail mostly even, of
    twelve feathers. Legs and toes short, slender.

    Generic Types. Div. I. _Todus Platyrhynchos._ Gm. Div. II. _Muscicapa
    barbata._ Lath.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

_P. olivaceus, subtus flavus; capite mentoque cinereis._

Olivaceous Flat-bill, beneath yellow. Head and chin cinereous.



The sober tints of this little bird accord more with those of Europe than
of India, of which country however it is a native, having been sent from
Ceylon to the British Museum: it is the only one I have yet seen, and
appears hitherto undescribed.

The stiff bristles at the corner of the mouth are nearly the length of the
bill, which is quite flattened: the tail is even, and the whole bird in
every respect but colour closely resembles the bearded Flycatcher (_Musc.
barbata_ Lath.).

Cuvier and other modern zoologists have done much in distributing the
Linnaean _Muscicapae_ into their natural families; but as we are acquainted
with a great number from descriptions only, the arrangement is by no means
perfect.

The generic characters now given of the genus _Platyrhynchos_ (very
slightly noticed by Vieillot) will be found perfectly applicable to the
separate divisions here formed; the first comprising the _Todus
Platyrhynchos_ of Gmelin, and a few others having the bill larger and more
dilated than the second division, which includes the present species,
together with _M. barbata_, _caerulea_, _cuneata_, and no doubt many
others. The construction of the bill in all these birds will be found
precisely the same, though more or less developed in each division, and
even in the species; it thus becomes impossible to draw the line of
demarcation without refining too much on generic distinctions. Their bills,
although so broad, are by no means stout; thus enabling them to prey with
greater readiness on the _Lepidoptera_ and other large winged insects with
soft bodies; while the long stiff bristles at the base of the bill seem
intended to confine the resistance their prey would otherwise make by their
wings. The illustrious Cuvier has well observed, that the true Flycatchers
have the bill longer, narrowed, less compressed, and the tip but slightly
bent.




Pl. 14

[Illustration]

PICUS rubiginosus.

_Brown Woodpecker._



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Rostrum polyedrum, rectum, in apicem compressum, cuneatum, attenuatum.
    Nares basales, ovales, patulae, plumis angustis recumbentibus tectae.
    Lingua longissima, jaculatoria, apice sagittato. Cauda rectricibus
    validis, rigidis, acuminatis,_ 10, _intermediis duabus longioribus.
    Pedes scansorii._

Typus Genericus _Picus viridis_.

    Bill many-sided, straight, the tip resembling a compressed pointed
    wedge. Nostrils basal, oval, open, covered externally with narrow
    recumbent feathers. Tongue very long, retractile, the tip barbed.
    Tail-feathers ten, strong, rigid, acuminated; the two middle ones
    longest. Feet climbing.

Generic Type _Picus viridis_.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _P. supra rubiginosus: vertice nigrescente; occipite rubro, subtus
    fulvo, fusco-fasciato._

    Above tawny rufous. Crown blackish; hind head crimson, beneath fulvous,
    with brown transverse bands.



The Woodpeckers form a most natural family of birds, and are dispersed in
every part of the known world, excepting the Polar regions. Eight species
inhabit Europe, five of which are found in our own country. The largest
however of these, the Great Black Woodpecker, is very rare; and even the
others are less frequently seen than formerly, from the gradual diminution
of our few remaining forests.

The present appears an undescribed species, and was sent from the Spanish
Main to E. Falkner, Esq. of Fairfield. I have since seen the male, which,
like many others of this genus, is distinguished by a patch of red below
the eye.

Total length, eight inches and a half; bill one inch long, blackish; front
and crown cinereous black; the hind head and nape crimson; a dusky whitish
line (beginning at the nostrils) includes the eye and ear-feathers; below
this on each side blackish, with longitudinal whitish dots, which in the
male is mixed near the bill with crimson; chin blackish, speckled with
white. The general plumage above is uniform tawny rufous brown, becoming
more olive on the rump. Under parts olivaceous yellow, crossed with
numerous close bands of blackish brown. Quills with the inner web black,
the margin pale yellow; shafts and outer web tawny; tail the same, the
shafts and outer half black, excepting the last pair, which have yellowish
shafts and dusky tips. Wings inside, pale orange. Legs and claws dusky
green.

Two or three other individuals have since fallen under my observation: the
male I saw at Mr. Leadbeater's, Animal Preserver, in Brewer-street, of
whose liberality and integrity in every way, I can bear the most
unqualified and cheerful testimony.




Pl. 15

[Illustration]

LICINIA Melite.



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Antennae graciles; clava elongata, fusiformi, compressa. Palpi
    brevissimi, vix ultra caput producti, ad linguam compressi, squamis
    linearibus tecti, margine ciliati, articulo ultimo sub-nudo, secundo
    subaequali. Abdomen elongatum, gracile, in maribus 6-articulatum,
    articulo ultimo integro; valvis plerumque elongatis, attenuatis, apice
    acutis. Alae anticae (in maribus) angustae, obtuse-attenuatae, (in
    foeminis) latiores, oblique rotundatae. Alae posticae (in maribus)
    dilatatae, longitudine anticis pene aequales; margine antico opaco, in
    foeminis breviores, suborbiculares._

Typus Genericus _L. Melite_. Nobis.

    Antennae slender, the club elongated, fusiform, and compressed. Palpi
    very short, hardly projecting beyond the head, compressed on the
    tongue, covered with scales and margined externally with long hairs,
    the last joint nearly naked and almost as long as the second joint.
    Body elongated, slender, in the male with 6 joints, the last entire.
    Valves generally elongated, attenuated, their tips acutely pointed.
    Anterior wings (in the male) narrow, obtusely attenuated; in the female
    broader, and obliquely rounded. Posterior (in the male) dilated, nearly
    as long as the anterior wings, the fore margin opaque; in the female
    shorter, and nearly orbicular.

Generic Type _L. Melite_.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _L. (Mas.) alis flavis; anteriore supra nigra, fascia obliqua flava, et
    linea, basali transversa, margine posteriore flavo. (Foem.) Alis supra
    albis; anteriore apice stigmateque marginali obliquo nigris; posteriore
    supra nigro marginata, subtus (in utroque sexu) flavescente, lineis
    duabus transversis fuscis._

    Male. Wings yellow, anterior above black, with an oblique yellow band
    and transverse basal line; posterior margin yellow. Fem. Wings above
    white; anterior, with the tips and marginal oblique stigma black.
    Posterior, above margined with black; beneath (in both sexes) yellow,
    with two transverse brown lines.

    Papilio Melite. _Fab. Ent. Syst._ 160, 494. _Cramer, tab._ 153. C. D.



The remarkable size of the under wings in the male insects of this genus
will distinguish them even to a casual observer as forming a natural group.
They are all natives of South America, where I discovered nine species. The
females differ most strikingly, and have hitherto been mistaken by authors
not only for distinct species, but as belonging to different genera.

Their natural situation will be among the _Pieridae_, with whose general
habit they accord.

The female of this species resembles _Pap. Licinia_ of Cramer, except in
having a short black stigma in the middle of the anterior border of the
fore wings, pointing obliquely to the exterior margin. Cramer's insect,
however, is the female of another undescribed species in my cabinet.

The under side of the posterior wings in both sexes is the same.




Pl. 16

[Illustration]

ISMENE Oedipodea.



GENERIC CHARACTER.

    _Antennae cylindraceae, juxta medium crassissimae, versus apicem
    subulatae, articulis numerosis brevissimis pene detectis. Palpi crassi
    squamosi, fronte obtusa, lateribus compressis, marginibus exterioribus
    ciliatis, articulo ultimo nudo, producto, subhorizontali, lineari,
    compresso. Oculi (in maribus) magni. Corpus (in maribus) 7-articulatum,
    articulo ultimo supra appendice transverso truncato subemarginato
    terminante, subtus duobus uncis recurvis obtusis, fasciculo tectis;
    articulo 1mo et ultimo brevissimis: (in foeminis) articulo ultimo
    producto, subacuminato._

    Antennae cylindrical, thickest near the middle, the terminal half
    subulate; articulations numerous, very short, hardly perceptible. Palpi
    thick, scaly; frontal side obtuse; lateral sides compressed; the
    margins externally fringed with hair; the last joint naked, lengthened,
    nearly horizontal, linear, compressed. Eyes (in the male) very large.
    Body (in the male) of seven joints, the last with a transverse,
    slightly emarginate, truncate appendage above; and two obtuse recurved
    hooks below, concealed by a tuft of hair; the first and last segment
    shortest. Body in the female with the last joint lengthened and
    pointed.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _I. alis supra fuscis, basi nitide-caerulea, posticis aurantio
    marginatis, subtus rufo-fusco nebulosis, basi puncto nigro: anticis (in
    maribus) basi aurantiis, macula nigra tomentosa._

    Wings above fuscous, shining blue at their base; posterior margined
    with orange; beneath clouded with rufous and brown, and a black dot at
    the base of the posterior wings. Anterior wings (in the male) orange at
    the base, and a large velvet-like spot of black.



The resplendent and changeable azure blue which ornaments the body and part
of the wings in this very singular insect, can be but ill expressed in the
figure. It is one of the many new and interesting subjects in entomology
discovered in Java by Dr. Horsfield; and by his kindness and liberality I
am enabled to add the figures of the caterpillar and chrysalis, which were
copied out of a fine series of drawings made in Java under his own eye:
they do not appear to differ in their formation from others of this family,
although the perfect insect possesses such striking and peculiar generic
characters; one of the many facts which prove the impossibility of making
the _Larvae_ a primary consideration in forming the genera of Lepidoptera.

This is a rare insect, I have therefore been obliged to leave the generic
character imperfect, as the dissection of the mouth, &c. would destroy the
specimen. The posterior margin in the wings of the male is sinuated; in the
female it is nearly straight; the underside of the wings in both sexes is
the same; the anterior pair reddish-brown, paler in the middle; the tip and
posterior margin whitish: inferior wings reddish-orange towards the inner
margin, with an obsolete central curved band of the same, and a black dot
at the base of the inferior wings. The head, palpi, and thorax are margined
with orange, less conspicuous in the female.

Our knowledge of the genus _Hesperia_ of Latreille (under which the present
insect would come) is little more than what was known of _Scarabaeus_
twenty years ago; nor has Fabricius even noticed one half of the species
figured by Cramer. The larva feeds on

GAERTNERA _Javensis_

    _Foliis ovatis, obtuse-acuminatis, caule volubili ramosissimo, ramulis
    diffusis, deflexis,_

a new species, discovered in Java by Dr. Horsfield, who has distinguished
it by the above specific character. He informs me the natives give it the
name of _Kakas-rambat_, which last word signifies twining or trailing. In
the inflorescence and fruit it differs not from _G. racemosa_.




Pl. 17

[Illustration]

BULIMUS zonatus.

_Zoned Bulimus._



GENERIC CHARACTER.--See Pl. 4.



SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

    _B. testa laevi conica; spirae anfractibus quinque; ultimo aliquantulum