THE

  SWORD AND GUN,

  A HISTORY OF THE

  37th WIS. VOLUNTEER INFANTRY.

  From its first Organization to its final Muster Out.

  BY MAJOR R. C. EDEN.


  MADISON:
  ATWOOD & RUBLEE, PRINTERS.
  1865.




  DEDICATED

  TO THE
  OFFICERS, NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE REGIMENT,
  AND
  TO THE MEMORY OF THOSE THAT FELL IN THE
  SIEGE OF PETERSBURG, 1864-1865,
  BY THE AUTHOR.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  Preface                                  5
  History--Chapter I                       7
           Chapter II                     17
           Chapter III                    39
  Table of Gain and Loss                  69
  Roster and Muster Rolls                 70
  List of Deaths                         110
  Final Roster                           117
  L'Envoi                                118




PREFACE.


I have attempted, in this small volume, to give a true and impartial
history of the brief but glorious career of our Regiment. Though
called into the field at a late hour, the services of the Regiment
have been arduous and severe, in the extreme, and, participating,
as it has done, in the last closing scenes of the rebellion, it has
shared in the honor and glory of winding up the secession movement.

These memoirs have been mostly compiled from memory, with the
assistance of the regimental and company records, and the
reminiscences of my brother officers.

For the literary excellence of the work, I claim no merit, as I have
not endeavored to accomplish more than the title of the work sets
forth: a plain "History of the 37th Regiment Wisconsin Volunteer
Infantry." As such a record, it may, I hope, be kindly received among
those whose deeds it sets forth; further than that I care little for
its fate.

A few years, and the scenes of this rebellion will become misty and
indistinct, through the veil of years; a few more, and it will have
become a matter of history, minor details and incidents being lost
and absorbed in the great broad facts of the period. Then, the author
has a hope, a vain one if you will, but springing from the pardonable
vanity of a parent in the offspring of his brain, that such records
as this will be prized as this generation is passing away, and those
who have shared in the stirring events of the time it treats of, may,

          ---- dying, mention it within their wills,
      Bequeathing it, as a rich legacy,
      Unto their issue.
                           [_Julius Cæsar, Act III, Scene 2._




CHAPTER I.


In the spring of 1864, a call having been made by the President for
500,000 fresh troops, his Excellency, James T. Lewis, issued an order
for the raising of a regiment to be designated the 37th Wisconsin
Volunteer Infantry.

To Sam. Harriman, of Somerset, St. Croix county, Captain of company
A, 30th Wisconsin, was entrusted the charge of raising this regiment,
and a commission as Colonel issued to him on the 7th of March.

The work of recruiting was immediately entered into with vigor, and,
on the 13th of April, 1864, the first company, (company, B, Capt. R.
C. Eden,) was mustered into the service of the United States, at the
rendezvous at Madison, by Capt. T. T. Brand, "for three years, unless
sooner discharged." On the afternoon of the same day, company C,
Capt. John Green, was also mustered in by the same officer, followed
on the 12th of the same month by company D, Capt. Alvah Nash, on the
16th by company A, Capt. S. Stevens, on the 18th by company E, Capt.
Frank A. Cole, on the 19th by company F, Capt. E. Burnett, on the 3d
of May by company G, Capt. W. W. Heller, and company H, Capt. Frank
T. Hobbs, on the 5th of May by company K, Capt. A. A. Burnett, and on
the 6th of the same month by company I, Capt. Geo. A. Beck.

On the 28th of April, companies A, B, C, D, E, and F left Camp
Randall, under command of Major Kershaw, and proceeded to
Washington, where they arrived on the 1st of May, and were encamped
on Arlington Heights, in the neighborhood of the Long Bridge.
Colonel Harriman accompanied the regiment as far as Chicago, from
which place he returned to Madison, to superintend the organization
of the four remaining companies. The journey was accomplished in
safety and without the occurrence of any noteworthy incident. On the
17th, the detachment was joined by companies H and I, and arms and
accoutrements being at once issued to the men, the instruction of
the regiment in the manual and battalion drill was at once proceeded
with, with vigor. Lieut. Col. Doolittle, having joined the regiment
at Chicago, assumed the command then and there, taking charge of the
disciplining and instructing of the eight companies, of which it was
then composed.

On the 28th of May, orders were received for the regiment to prepare
for the field, and to be ready to march by the next morning. The
comfortable "wedge" and "wall" tents in which men and officers had
been luxuriating and gaining their first experience of camp life
were, accordingly, turned in to the Regimental Quartermaster, and the
fragmentary and disjointed dwellings, known to the polite world as
shelter tents, or _tentes d'abri_, but known amongst soldiers as _pup
tents_, were issued in their stead. All extra baggage was disposed
of, and the comforts of civilized life bid adieu to, "for three years
unless sooner discharged."

At daylight, on the morning of the 29th, we took up our line of
march for Alexandria, thus entering on our first campaign. The
morning was sunny and clear, and as the sun gained power, became
unpleasantly warm, and a source of no little distress to men unused
to marching and the encumbrance of gun, knapsack and accoutrements,
as ours were. About ten o'clock, we arrived in the suburbs of
Alexandria, where we rested for an hour or two, awaiting orders as to
our further disposition.

The transports on which we were to embark for White House Landing,
on the Pamunkey River, the then base of supplies of the Army of
Virginia, had arrived the night previous and were then engaged in
taking on board a large herd of cattle, which was to form part of
their live freight, and we were accordingly ordered into camp on
the banks of the river where we remained till 5 o'clock on the
afternoon of the 30th. The work of embarking the troops was then
commenced, and our Regiment was divided into three divisions, which
were distributed as follows: Companies B and E were assigned to the
propeller _S. Cloud_, under command of Capt. Eden, of company B; the
propeller _Andrew Harder_ carried companies A, C, D and F, under
command of Lieut. Col. Doolittle, while Capt. Hobbs took command of
the remainder of the detachment on board of the _Charles Osgood_.

With the exception of the _Harder's_ grounding on a sand bank just
above Mt. Vernon, and nearly involving the _Cloud_, which came to
her assistance, in a like catastrophe, no incident, unpleasant or
otherwise, occurred to mar the tranquility of our passage down the
Potomac.

We made a pleasant run down Chesapeake Bay, and the morning of
the second of June found us, after a close escape from grounding
on York Spit,--a long narrow point of sand off the mouth of York
River,--preparing to anchor off Yorktown to wait for a pilot to
conduct us up the intricate navigation of the York and Pamunkey
Rivers. The original intention had been for us to follow up the
_Harder_, the only vessel in the squadron that carried a government
pilot, but owing to her neglecting to display a proper signal, during
the night, we had lost sight of her and were consequently left to our
own resources.

Our preparations for anchoring were yet in course of completion when
the pilot was seen, coming out of Yorktown, and the squadron was
again headed up the York River. About noon we passed West Point,
an insignificant collection of small dwellings, situated on a long
point of land between the York and Pamunkey rivers, and just at their
junction. From this point to White House Landing the Pamunkey is,
perhaps, as crooked a river as can be found in the United States. The
channel, however, is straight and deep, running between low, flat
marshes occasionally relieved with high, steep banks and well wooded
bluffs, capital points for guerrilla operations.

Rumors were rife as to the exploits of these gentry, in this
neighborhood, and the several divisions of the detachment received
orders to load, many of them then performing that operation for the
first time. The size of our squadron, however, and the presence of
several "tin-clads" and "double enders," those "restless wanderers
of the _deeps_" and shallows, tended no doubt to awe the bushwhackers
and keep them on their best behavior.

At any rate the Thirty-Seventh passed along, unmolested and
unmolesting, except when an insubordinate recruit would insist on
trying the range of Springfield or (contraband) Colt on sundry and
divers vagabond members of the porcine tribe, that seemed to lead
an aimless and unsatisfactory life, on the banks of the Pamunkey.
And so the long summer's day passed away, with the hot perpendicular
rays of the sun shining down on our bare decks, unchecked by awning
or shelter of any kind, frying the pitch out of the deck seams and
reducing the tar in the rigging to the consistency of molasses and
leaving about as pleasant an impression on the incautious hands of
those who ventured to touch strand or stay. But "all things come
to an end," says the wise man, and so even will a long hot summer
day, if it is passed on board a crowded transport, with a scarcity
of standing, sitting or lying room, a still greater scarcity of
drinkable water, and an utter absence of anything at all approaching
to comfort.

About 5 P. M., a sudden turn in the river brings us in sight of the
chimneys of what once was the White House, from which the landing,
which is for the present to be our destination, takes its name. A few
more throbbing, restless pulsations of our propeller's wheel, and
its action grows fainter and slower as, amidst a crowd of steamers,
propellers, tug-boats, schooners, barges, scows, skiffs, and all
the crowd of craft incident to a base of supplies, we work our way
up to the landing. Again a few more revolutions of the wheel, a jar
and a crash accompanied by a few nautical expletives, and we grind
alongside of a sutler's barge, blundering down stream, without any
apparent directing power or any definite object in view; till at
length one of the never-resting, spiteful looking, ever-watchful
tug-boats darts out from some labyrinth of hulls, pounces on it and
drags it away, awkward and clumsy and apparently remonstrating and
resisting to the last, into its proper and designated mooring place.
Then a sudden cessation of the, to all appearance, endless jar and
throb of the screw, a tangled web of heaving-lines flying through the
air, a deafening roar as the pent up steam raises the valve and comes
tumbling out at the escape pipe and eddies and whirls about as if for
pure joy at its liberation from restraint; a few more double-shotted
nautical expletives, a vast amount of veering and hauling on heavy
hawsers and the transports are made fast and our voyage ended.

But, if the confusion on the river was great, that on the shore was
certainly, to all appearances, much greater. Mule drivers, addressing
their jaded teams by every soothing and endearing epithet in the well
stocked vocabulary of their class, and the mules replying in their
scarcely less intelligible, and much less profane, dialect; long
wagon trains, coming and going in every direction; colored laborers,
rolling barrels on to every bodies' toes, their own included, and
becoming the patient recipients of remarks objurgatory of their eyes
and limbs, therefor. Long lines of stretchers loaded with wounded
being carried on board two large hospital steamers, loading for
Washington; ambulances arriving from the front, with fresh cases;
orderlies, hot and dusty, riding, walking, or running in every
direction; clouds of dust and smoke, from camp fires and steamboats;
shouting, braying, swearing, yelling, (from the mules) whistling from
the steamboats, combined altogether to form a scene of noise and
confusion, to which the grand finale at the tower of Babel was, by
comparison, nothing but a quiet assemblage of sober and well behaved
mechanics. Threading our way, with no little difficulty, through this
motley assemblage, we at length gained a quiet and comparatively
secluded spot where we were, much to our relief, ordered to camp; and
this we, nothing loth, proceeded at once to do.

Here we remained, guarding prisoners and picketing along the line of
the Richmond railroad, till the 10th of June; here we, for the first
time, heard the sound of shotted guns, as the terrible battle of
the 3d of June surged and roared, nearly twenty miles away, in our
front. And all that night, and part of the 4th, the long trains of
ambulances, each bearing its ghastly load of bleeding and suffering
men, rolled through our camp, giving us our first insight into the
horrors of war, in which we were soon to take an active part. Here,
too, we had a first insight into the heroism and patience under
suffering of those who form our armies; numbers of slightly wounded,
or, who at least were not absolutely prevented from traveling by the
loss of limbs, came straggling through our camps, many only just able
to limp along; some with hands or arms bandaged; others with ugly
cuts on the head or face, their hair all matted and tangled, soaked
with blood and clogged with the dust of the road, hungry, thirsty,
weary and suffering, but uttering no complaints, and patient and
cheerful under it all.

And in the Depot Hospital at the landing we had an opportunity of
witnessing the heroic and charitable part the women of America were
taking in the war. No matter how ragged or dirty the sufferer,
how hideous or revolting the wound, alive in many instances with
maggots, and in every form of putrefaction and mortification; no
matter what nation or country the patient belonged to; woman's kind,
ministering hand was there, to wash the festering wound, to bathe the
toil-worn feet, to comb the matted locks, hold the cooling draught
to the parched lips, or to receive the last words that fell from
them e'er they were closed forever. And this without reward or hire,
or expectation of it, their only recompense the consciousness of
obeying the mandate that makes charity our duty, their only reward
the knowledge that they are aiding to maintain the government and
preserve the integrity of the stars and stripes.

But we linger too long around White House Landing and scenes, which,
though then novel and strange to us, have since become a part of
our every day life. On the 10th of June, we were dispatched from
the base as guard to a supply train, under charge of Capt. Alex.
Samuels, of the 5th Wisconsin, which was on its way to the front
at Cool Arbor, or Cold Harbor, as it is sometimes written. Much
dispute has been held, as to the orthography and derivation of the
name of this place, it being called indiscriminately Cool Arbor, Cold
Harbor, Cool Harbor, and Coal Harbor. The first would, however, seem
to be the most appropriate designation, as there is no Harbor, nor
any navigable stream to convert into one, within ten miles of the
place. I have been informed by a Virginian who is acquainted with the
locality, that the name originated as follows:

Cool Arbor, which is nothing more than a large farm house or tavern
on one of the main highways leading to Richmond, was originally built
by an Englishman, as a place of summer resort for the citizens of
that place, and named by him Cool Arbor, from its pleasant and shady
location. The proverbial (H)english disregard of the use of the
aspirate probably converted the second word of the name into Harbor,
and a broad provincial dialect would easily effect the transition
from Cool to Coal or Cold. Its claim to either title is now a poor
one, for trees and farm have both alike disappeared, and in the words
of the poet, "_perierunt etiam ruinæ_"--the very ruins are gone.

At this place we arrived in safety after a long and tedious march of
nearly twenty miles, along a heavy, sandy road plentifully bestrewn
with dead mules, wagons broken or stuck in the swamps, and abandoned,
and all the _debris_ usually to be seen on the line of communication
between a large army and its base. Our march was only marked by the
incidents common to such a trip; an overturned wagon now and then to
be righted, or a broken-down mule to be led to the roadside and shot;
a vexatious delay of perhaps half an hour, to make some repair to
harness or wheels, and then a forced march for a mile or two to catch
up with the rest of the train.

To any one that has never tried it, the task of guarding a wagon
train may, perhaps, be recommended as an amusement, on the score of
novelty, but we hardly think it is one that can be either pleasantly
or profitably followed up, as a steady trade.

On arriving at Cool Arbor we were assigned to the 1st Brigade, 3d
Division of the 9th, or Burnside's, Army Corps, temporarily attached
to the Army of the Potomac, though in reality belonging to no army
in particular, and better known amongst military men as "Burnside's
Traveling Menagerie," so called, not from the heterogeneous
collection composing it, but from the wandering nature of the service
it had been engaged in since its organization. Our Division Commander
was Brig. Gen. O. B. Willcox, of the regular army, since promoted to
be Brevet Major General, and our Brigade Commander, Brig. Gen. John
F. Hartranft, afterwards Major General of Volunteers, commanding the
Third Provisional Division of the 9th Army Corps.

On the morning of the 12th of June we were ordered from the position
we held on the flank, into the front line of works, where we had
the pleasure of listening to the music of shot and shell, and of
inspecting a rebel line of fortifications, for the first time.




CHAPTER II.

THE SIEGE OF PETERSBURG.


On the evening of the 12th of June, just as we had settled ourselves
down, to pass, as best we might, our first night in the trenches, and
amid the roar of artillery and the uncouth yells of the combatants,
to snatch a few hours' much needed sleep, we received orders to pack
up and be ready to march an hour after sundown, to exercise the
utmost caution in our movements, and to allow no talking nor rattling
of arms, accoutrements or equipage to be heard, bayonets to be
unfixed and arms carried at the trail.

And it was so. Quietly and stealthily on that still June evening
the whole Army of the Potomac stole away from under the dark sombre
pine woods where it laid encamped, and commenced its flank march on
Petersburg. Our road, for the first ten or twelve miles, lay in the
direction of White House Landing, and, except that we kept to the
fields, the roads being occupied by our trains and artillery, was
almost a repetition of our route from the Landing to the front.

Just short of White House, however, we turned sharp to the right and
kept away for Baltimore and Kent Cross Roads and Charles City Court
House. At the last named place we were delayed some twelve hours by
the 2d Corps supply train failing to connect, thus affording us a
rest, which, however much it may have disconcerted the plans of the
Lieutenant General, was very acceptable to the men, on whom the long
and rapid marching was beginning to tell.

We resumed our march about an hour before sundown on the afternoon of
the 15th, and at dark were crossing the James River on the pontoons
laid over it at Harrison's Landing. Our course then lay along the
left bank of the river and parallel to it, leaving City Point on our
right and bringing us up to the front of the city of Petersburg,
about 4 o'clock on the afternoon of the 16th of June.

Our sufferings on this day's march, from heat, thirst and fatigue
combined, were severe in the extreme, but, to the credit of our
regiment, with the exception of one or two cases of sun stroke, not a
man fell out, or was missing when we arrived at our final destination.

We had hardly halted and commenced preparations for supper when we
were ordered to move on to support a charge about to be made by the
4th, or colored division, of our corps, and so marched about a mile
further, formed line of battle in a piece of pine woods and awaited
orders. But a short time had elapsed before a confused cheer, or
rather yell, in our front followed by a dropping fire of musketry
and a few rounds from the artillery told that the ball had opened
and that our turn might arrive any minute. The firing, however,
gradually died away without our services being required, and we
shortly learned that the sable gentry had been successful and had
carried the first line of the defences of Petersburg. Supposing that
our services would not be further required, we proceeded to prepare
our long deferred and much desired supper, but hardly had the scent
of the coffee--the great stand-by and panacea of the soldiery--become
perceptible to our expectant senses, before the unwelcome order came
for us again to move and hold the line of works the colored troops
had taken. With many a sigh, the tempting decoction of the Arabian
herb was consigned to the sacred soil of Virginia--in plain English
we threw away our coffee--and with many an insubordinate growl and
execration on the "exigencies of the service," we started for our
new scene of labors. A few solid shot and shell, and one or two
rounds of case and canister were pitched at us as we moved up to the
works, which beyond creating some slight consternation, did no damage
whatever, and, having occupied the old line of rebel works, we passed
the night without molestation and in comparative peace.

Early on the morning of the 17th June, the brigade was formed in line
of battle, in a ravine, preparatory to charging a line of works,
extending from the Bagster Road almost to Hare Hill, the future site
of Fort Steadman. This line of works was situated in the middle of a
field of corn, then just in the tassel, on the crest of a ridge or
slight elevation, and was built in the shape of the letter V, the
apex of the line being towards the rear. To the right and left of the
line were batteries, and another in a narrow section of pine woods
covered the centre of the line. Though not very strongly manned, the
work was a heavy one, and from its commanding position and the heavy
enfilading fire that could be brought to bear on almost any part
of it, not by any means an easy one to carry. Our line was however
formed, and we stood there, the hot bright sun almost blinding us
and heating the dry sand under our feet, till it almost blistered
them, awaiting the orders to commence our first battle. A desultory
fire was being kept up by a line of skirmishers and sharpshooters
entrenched a little in advance of our line and a round of spherical
case or canister would occasionally come whistling over our heads,
spattering sharply and viciously through the timber close in our rear
and making the limbs and splinters fly far and wide. At length the
preparations were all made, and with beating hearts we waited for
the word; it came at last: "Forward, double quick! charge!" a wild,
loud cheer, rolls along from one end to the other of the brigade, a
sudden trampling of feet breaks in on the comparative quiet of the
summer's morning, a few seconds and the line of works in our front
becomes wreathed in smoke, as we mount a low bank which had hitherto
concealed it from our view;--an angry roar from the batteries in
the woods in front of us, and an hailstorm of shot, shell, grape,
canister, and minie balls screaming through the air above and around
us and throwing up clouds of dust, as they strike the sand in every
direction, till the whole battle field is obscured by a heavy cloud
of dust and smoke through which the rebel works in front of us and
their truculent looking butternut defenders are barely discernible.
And through it all the wild cheering yell of our boys as they
pant and struggle on through the deep sand, which fills mouth and
nostrils, almost suffocating us; the crash and roar of cannon and
musketry, the bursting of shells, the whiz of the missiles as they
pass, the cries of the wounded as they roll over in their agony, all
blended and mingling together, yet each sound distinct and clear
as if the only one to break the stillness of the summer air. But
no words can paint a battle any more than can canvas portray its
details, which only those who have participated in can appreciate or
understand. On we go,

      "On, on, through the hell-fire of shrapnel and shell
      On without faltering, right on with a yell,"

till we see the scowling, wolfish looking faces of the rebels
in their works, till their fire slackens, till we can see the
artillerymen working the guns of the battery on our left limbering up
their pieces and starting to the rear, till the right of their line
breaks slowly from their works and retires to the rear.

Then comes an order "half wheel to the right," a wavering confused
movement along the whole line, a yell of derision from the Rebels,
a sudden recommencement of their fire; and, with victory within its
grasp, the brigade falls back on the line of works they lately left
confident of victory, shattered and broken and leaving hundreds of
its numbers on the field.

From whom the order came directing the movement to the right has
never, I believe, been satisfactorily established, but to this
order, exposing the whole brigade, as it did, to a most severe
enfilading fire, may be attributed the failure of the charge and the
heavy loss sustained by the brigade. Our leading files were close up
to the works, the Rebels were withdrawing their men and guns, and had
we but been allowed to go right ahead, we should have taken the whole
and suffered much less loss than we did. Had we done so, our entrance
into Petersburg that afternoon would have been easily accomplished,
as the troops opposed to us were nothing but the Petersburg Reserves,
raw militia, and few in number.

Our regiment suffered severely in this its first day's fight. Major
Kershaw was shot through the legs; Lieut. Colonel Doolittle was
slightly wounded in the shoulder and had his shoulder strap torn off
by a piece of a shell; Lieut. Earl, Co. B, received a gunshot wound
which caused his death shortly afterwards; Lieut. F. B. Riddle, Co.
C, was mortally wounded, and Capt. Green received a slight contusion
from a piece of shell.

In this engagement Serg't Greene, of company C, the Regimental Color
Bearer, was shot through both legs by a grape shot, in the early part
of the fight; unable to walk and fearful lest the colors entrusted
to his charge, should fall into the hands of the enemy, he rolled up
the flag on the staff and seizing this in his teeth, drew himself
off the field and behind the works into a place of safety. Such
unselfish heroism is deserving the highest commendation, though poor
Greene lived barely long enough to know that his courageous act was
known and appreciated. Our loss in killed and wounded in this battle
amounted to 138 of which number 44 were killed on the field and 10
died from the effects of their wounds.

I do not suppose that a more disheartened and, for the time, broken
down set of men ever met together, than the scattered fragments of
our regiment when we collected in the ravine after our ill-fated
charge on the first day of the battle of Petersburg. Our men had
been marched for four successive days and nights, had had little or
no sleep for five, and been on short rations for the same period. To
this may be added that depressed feeling, the natural sequence of
great excitement, which always follows a battle, even if successful;
the loss of so many of our number, and a feeling that would creep
in--that there had been a blunder, somewhere.

We remained in the ravine for an hour or two, getting rest and
refreshment, of both of which we stood in much need. Towards night,
however, we were ordered forward to support the Second Division who
had advanced their works some way up the field. We accordingly took
possession of a partially constructed breastwork on the edge of the
ravine, and after an hour or two employed in further completing and
strengthening our defences, lay down to get what rest we could to
prepare us for what the morrow might have in store for us. We slept
that night, without rocking, and a heavy fire that the enemy opened
on our lines during the night, hardly awakened us. At daylight
we were roused up and ordered to advance in line of battle, with
two companies deployed as skirmishers, which order, however, was
afterwards modified by the 8th Michigan being deployed along the
whole Brigade front.

We advanced steadily and slowly over the scene of yesterday's
battle and found the line of works for which we had then contended
unoccupied, except by the rebel dead, who were pretty thickly piled
up all along the works. We entered the woods I have before mentioned
as being in the rear of the defenses, in which we found traces of
a large camp, which had evidently been abandoned in great haste.
Muster rolls and other military records, more or less complete, were
scattered round in every direction, cooking utensils and a variety of
eatables lay round everywhere, forming, with worn out clothing and
accoutrements and the remains of the huts and tents, a lively picture
of confusion and ruin.

A brisk fire on the skirmish line showed that we were fast
approaching the scene of action, and on reaching the edge of the
timber we were ordered to build breastworks and await the arrival of
Gen. Bartlett's command on our right. The day was clear and bright,
and, owing to a light northerly breeze, not unpleasantly warm. Our
boys soon threw up a light line of works and lay down under the shade
of the pines to rest.

The situation was a picturesque one not devoid of a certain
solemnity. The light breeze hummed through the pines overhead, with
a pleasant dreamy sound; before us lay a field of oats, waving and
undulating in alternate light and shade as the soft breath of the
summer wind passed over it; far off on the right the distant spires
of Petersburg showed faint and indistinct through the soft blue haze;
on our left a cloud of dark, black smoke curled lazily up over the
tree tops, and dropped gently away to leeward from where a large
cotton factory had been fired by the rebels in their retreat. The air
was alive with the hum of insects and the chirp of birds, and in the
trees, on the left of our regiment, a mocking bird was whistling,
softly but clearly. It was a strange scene, the long lines of faces,
the subdued murmur of conversation, broken only by an occasional shot
from the skirmish line, sounding strangely distant and unreal, and
the flickering shadow of the pine boughs falling at times on some
sunburnt face, with a grave fixed look on it, which showed how the
thoughts were then traveling back over hundreds of miles to some spot
in the far-off North where the loved ones lay, little conscious of
the fate of their nearest and dearest.

On many faces there a darker shadow than that of the pine boughs was
soon to fall forever, and a brighter and more lasting glory than that
of the sun's rays, as the swaying boughs moved aside and let in the
gleaming light. For many there, their last sun had arisen, and the
fitful slumber that now from time to time drooped their eyelids was
but the prelude to the "sleep that knows no waking."

But our thoughts were soon recalled to the realities of the occasion
by the order to advance, and under a sharp fire of cannon and
musketry we pressed on across the oat-field towards a line of works
just discernible, ahead of us. On we went, steadily and unwaveringly,
halting only once to reform the line which had become somewhat broken
from the uneven nature of the ground over which we were advancing.
Forward! again with a cheer, and we see their skirmishers falling
back on their main line of battle; forward a few steps more, and a
wide trench unexpectedly opens before us--it is a deep cut on the
Norfolk and Petersburg railroad. A momentary pause as we catch in a
telegraph wire cunningly stretched on stakes and hid in the long rank
grass on the edge of the cut, and a withering volley sweeps the top
of the cut, and numbers roll down its steep sides to find a grave in
the muddy ditches on the side of the track. Up the steep bank, on
the opposite side, the fragments of our brigade try, once more, to
charge, but the fire that meets them is too heavy, and they fall back
under the protection of the sides of the cut.

Twice again they attempt it, and twice again they are compelled to
fall back, leaving many of their number behind on each successive
charge. And now, on our right, the enemy's sharpshooters have got
into position and, firing along the whole length of the cut, pick off
a man at every shot. Capt. Stevens, of Co. A, is mortally wounded,
and 2d Lieut. Lowber, of the same company, receives a ball through
his fore-arm, thus leaving that company without an officer. And
now the enemy are seen getting a battery into position on a height
commanding the whole of our position. None of our artillery has yet
come up to support us, and our position if not a critical, is at
least, a most anxious one. But soon the sharp crack of a Napoleon
is heard in our rear and the solid shot hums along over our heads
and sends up a cloud of dust and splinters as it strikes where the
rebels are trying to build an earthwork, and Capt. Romer, of the 34th
N. Y., has got his guns into position, and with a few well directed
shots, shells the rebels away from their covert. The crack of those
Napoleons was a thoroughly welcome sound to us all, for it gave
evidence that we were not all alone nor without backers, which, as
the troops on our right and left did not connect with us, appeared at
one time to be the case.

And so the 18th of June, a day memorable in the history of battles,
as the anniversary of Waterloo and Bunker Hill, wore to a close, and
as the welcome shades of night drew in around us, fresh troops taking
our place, we fell back to the woods we had left in the morning, with
sadly diminished numbers, thoroughly wearied and exhausted.

Our loss in this day's battle, though not so severe as in the charge
of the preceding day was, nevertheless, very heavy in proportion to
the number of men engaged. In company A, Capt. Stevens was mortally,
and 2d Lieut. D. A. Lowber, severely wounded, and company B lost its
2d Lieut. N. S. Davison, shot through the shoulder. Our total loss
in killed and wounded was 103, of which number 20 were killed on the
field or died of wounds, and 83 wounded, making with the casualties
of yesterday, an aggregate of 64 killed and 186 wounded. Total loss
250 out of 400.

We remained in the position to which we retired on the night of the
18th June, till the evening of the 20th of the same month, when we
again occupied the front line of works to the right of our previous
position on an eminence known as Hare Hill, so called from the owner
of the plantation on which it is situated, and which was afterwards
chosen as the site for Fort Steadman.

We remained here till the morning of the 22d, when we returned to
our old position, on the Norfolk and Petersburg R. R., where we
remained doing picket and fatigue duty, exposed day and night to a
heavy fire of artillery and musketry, till the 10th of July. On the
28th of June, Lieut. David Prutsman, of company D, was killed by
one of the enemy's sharpshooters while sitting at breakfast, in the
trenches, and our losses in all up to this period amounted to 286
rank and file. In addition to this the extreme heat of the weather
and the confinement to which they were subjected in the trenches, had
caused our previously well thinned ranks to be reduced still lower by
sickness. The position of the regiment, all through the hot summer
months was, indeed, anything but enjoyable, lying on the dusty, sandy
ground, exposed to the full power of the sun's rays by day and the
damp chilly dews by night; obliged to remain in a recumbent position,
where to raise a cap above the breastwork was to make it the target
for half a dozen sharpshooters; water, even for drinking purposes,
hard to get and poor at that, so that when on the 10th of July we
were ordered to the rear, it was hailed by all as a respite from
prison.

After a week's rest, during which, for fear I suppose that the men
might get lazy for want of work, they were kept busy cutting and
carrying material for abattis, the 37th was, on the 17th July, again
ordered into the trenches, where they remained till the morning of
the 30th of July, the day of the battle of Cemetery Hill, or as it is
generally called the "Mine Fort."

This Fort, which was one of the strongest of the enemy's works,
was situated on a hill a little to the right, and in front of our
position, immediately in front of the cemetery at Blandford, one of
the suburbs of Petersburg. A mine had been driven under the direction
of Colonel Pleasant of the 48th Penn. Vol. Inf., from the rear of
the Horse-shoe, where our regiment lay, under this fort, had been
charged and primed, and was to be exploded at daylight on the morning
of the 30th. Immediately on the explosion of the mine, the 9th corps
was to advance on the crater and, taking advantage of the confusion
and consternation excited, endeavor to break and hold the enemy's
line. On eminences to the right and left of Cemetery Hill were forts
which commanded it, and from which a severe enfilading fire could be
directed on the fort itself, and an error in the plan of attack seems
to have been the neglect of having a force ready to attack and, if
possible, capture these works simultaneously with the assault on the
main work, for, had they been captured or their fire silenced, there
is no doubt but that a permanent lodgment would have been effected
in the main line of the defences of Petersburg.

From the report of the Committee on the Conduct of the War, the blame
of the failure of the whole plan, in consequence of this blunder,
seems to be attributed to General Meade, and it would certainly seem
to be an act of negligence on his part, with the force he had at his
disposal, to leave these important points unmolested.

The original arrangement had been to explode the mine at half past
four A. M., and for the assaulting column to advance immediately,
but, owing to a fault in the fuse, it was nearly 6 o'clock before the
explosion took place. At that time a vast column of smoke mingled
with earth, fragments of guns and platforms, logs, sand-bags, gabions
and human beings shot towering into the air to an immense height,
gradually subsiding again and followed immediately by a dull,
smothered roar which shook the ground for miles round, and was said
to have been felt even to City Point. A pause, in which one might
count, perhaps a dozen beats at the wrist, and 85 pieces of heavy
artillery opened almost simultaneously on the rebel lines. The enemy
was not slow in replying, and soon the light artillery and musketry
chimed in, making the noise completely deafening, and the very
ground under our feet to vibrate. From 6 till 12 this hellish uproar
continued unabated at which time it commenced to slacken, till, by
four o'clock, it died away, and, as the last of our troops fell back
from the crater, the battle of July 30th was at an end.

On the explosion of the mine, the rebels fled from their works on
each side of it, panic stricken, but, owing to some unaccountable
blunder, this panic was not taken advantage of, as it might, and
should have been, and the word to advance not being given, for some
minutes, time was given the rebels to recover from the consternation
into which the explosion, thoroughly unlooked for by them, had thrown
them.

The word was given, at last; the charge was made, and the crater
of the exploded mine occupied by our troops at an inconsiderable
loss. Col. Harriman, assisted by Adjutant C. I. Miltimore and men
from different regiments, succeeded in extricating two of the rebel
guns from the ruins of the fort, and turning them against their late
possessors.

The rebels had, by this time, however, recovered from their first
panic, which had led them to hastily and precipitately abandon the
works on each side the fort, and were forming in line of battle for
the purpose of recapturing the ruins of the works, and, to cover the
attack, were pouring in a tremendous enfilading fire from the two
forts on the right and left. Reinforcements were sent into the crater
from time to time, but no orders being given for an attack on either
of the flanking works, the crater had, by this time, become densely
packed with troops, and the explosion having completely leveled the
parapet, they were left almost entirely without protection, and the
whole place soon become a perfect slaughter house. The position was
held, however, till about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, when, the
rebels having advanced near enough to plant their colors on the
outside of the works, and our men being unable to accomplish anything
or to hold the works without immense loss of life, orders were given
for them to fall back to our main line, which was accordingly done.

In this engagement, out of two hundred and fifty men who went into
action in the morning, only 95 remained to answer their names at
roll-call that evening. Capt. A. A. Burnett, of company K, received
a wound in the head, from the effects of which he died on the 18th
of August; Capt. Frank A. Cole, received a severe wound in the hip,
which necessitated an operation which proved fatal; Lieuts. Atwell,
G; L. U. Beal, E, and George D. McDill, K, also received wounds which
incapacitated them from further service, and Lieuts. Munger, D, and
Holmes, G, were taken prisoners.

On the evening of the battle, the regiment was relieved from the
front line and allowed to withdraw to the rear, where it remained,
doing fatigue duty, till the 19th of August.

On the night of the 19th, the whole regiment was sent out on fatigue,
the work in which they were engaged being the erection of a large
fort, afterwards named Fort Schenckl, on the Jerusalem Plankroad.

On returning to camp at daylight, next morning, orders were found
awaiting us, "to strike tents and get ready to march at once." This
was no very welcome order for men who had been hard at work all
night, part of the time exposed to a rather brisk artillery fire;
but there was no help for it, the rest of the brigade had already
started, and so after a hasty cup of coffee and a half hour's nap we
started out to overtake the command. After a long and tedious march
through rain and mud, made at a rapid rate, we caught up with the
remainder of the brigade, which had moved out before daylight, near
the Yellow Tavern, and after a short rest were ordered into action to
repel an attack of the enemy on our front line. The rebels fell back
as we advanced, being driven by us through the woods, till, gaining
an open place and receiving reinforcements, they once more made a
stand, and the 37th was ordered to take up a new position further to
the left, which they did, and held the same till dark, having lost
ten killed and wounded during the battle. During the night of the
19th and throughout the whole of the 20th, the regiment was moved,
from point to point, as the enemy massed his troops in different
positions, in attempting to regain possession of the Weldon road.

At an early hour on the 21st of August, the regiment was set to work
building a line of entrenchments across the Weldon railroad, facing
towards the rear of our main line of works. The works were hardly
completed before a determined and combined attack was made by the
enemy on three different points, simultaneously, for the purpose
of regaining possession of the railroad. The 37th was ordered up
to support the 19th New York battery, which was in position on the
extreme left of our line, and which was suffering severely from the
effects of a rapid and well directed fire which was being directed
against them from a rebel battery in their rear and to the left. In
performing this duty the 37th suffered severely, losing 10 killed
and 25 wounded, but succeeding in finally compelling the enemy to
withdraw his guns.

Till the 25th the men wore kept hard at work doing picket and guard
duty, and building breastworks and fortifications commanding the
Weldon railroad and its approaches. On that day, however, we were
once more ordered to march, our destination being Reams' Station,
where the 2d Corps was engaged and in need of support. On approaching
the scene of action we soon found strong presumptive evidence of the
truth of this position, the road, for several miles, being thickly
lined with stragglers wearing the clover leaf, the distinguishing
badge of the 2d Corps, and showing that an active retrograde move was
in progression. A part of our brigade was kept to do provost guard
duty and stop and re-assemble the stragglers as best they might,
while the rest, including the 37th, pushed on and covered the retreat
of the 2d Corps, holding the enemy in check till dark, when we fell
back within our lines and slept on our arms that night.

On the 27th a new line of works was constructed and a new camp formed
near Blick Station, where the time was passed till the 24th of
September in guard and picket duty. On the 29th the regiment moved to
the neighborhood of the Yellow Tavern, where Colonel Harriman assumed
command of the brigade, now 1st Brig. 1st Div. 9th A. C., and Major
Kershaw, who had partially recovered from the effects of the wounds
he received on the 17th of June, and had rejoined the regiment,
took command of the same. The brigade marched to the neighborhood
of Poplar Grove Church where it was formed as reserve to the second
brigade, which was about to assault the enemy's works defending the
South Side Railroad and which were distant about a mile and a half.

In the charge, the 2d brigade was repulsed and, retiring in disorder,
threw part of the 1st brigade into confusion; a battery also which
had been sent up to check the advance of the enemy, retreated
rapidly to the rear, as the enemy advanced from out of the wood,
thus materially adding to the confusion. The 37th fell back to where
the temporary shelter of a fence enabled them to reform their line
of battle, and by a heavy and well sustained fire, repulsed several
attacks of the enemy, and held the position till reinforcements
arrived and the imminent defeat was thus rendered a victory. The
same night the regiment went into camp on the Pegram farm where they
constructed a heavy line of works strongly protected by forts and a
line of abattis. The losses of the regiment in this successive series
of battles amounted in all to 25 killed and 75 wounded, and gained
it a reputation which it has maintained untarnished to the end. We
remained in camp on the Pegram farm and in that vicinity, occupied in
picket and fatigue duty till the 28th of October, when we took part
in the reconnaissance in force made in the direction of Thatcher's
Run. Our loss in this affair was very trifling, only two men being
wounded, one very slightly. We advanced about three miles, meeting
little or no opposition, and having entrenched and remained one night
in the immediate presence of the enemy, we fell back to our former
position on the morning of the 29th. During this movement Adjt. C. T.
Miltimore was wounded whilst on the picket line.

In the latter part of November, the 9th corps was moved from the
extreme left to the extreme right of the Army of the Potomac, its
left resting on the Weldon R. R. and its right on the Appomattox;
this brought the 1st Brigade back to their old station in front
of the Mine or Crater Fort, with the 37th Wis. and 109th N. Y. in
reserve in the woods, in the rear of the main line.

Our time here was fully occupied in building houses for the winter,
standing picket, doing guard and fatigue duty more or less exposed to
the enemy's fire, day and night.

On the 8th of December the 37th, in company with the 109th N. Y.
were ordered to move to the rear and report to Brevet Col. Robinson,
commanding Provisional Brigade. We moved out soon after dark on a
bitter cold night, a cutting north-east wind sweeping over the bare
surface of the country with a chill that went to the marrow. All that
night and the next day and night, when a mingled storm of rain and
snow set in, as if to cap the climax and add what little was wanting,
of making our situation as uncomfortable as possible, we remained on
a bare open common, without any tents, a good many without blankets,
and with nothing at hand with which to build a fire.

The Sanitary Commission, with its well-known generosity, sent down a
pair of woolen mittens and a cup of hot milk punch for each man in
the brigade, on the evening of the second day, which added materially
to our comfort and rendered our situation somewhat more endurable.

At length, at about 3 o'clock of the afternoon of the third day, the
orders came to march. It was drawing towards the close of a dull, raw
winter's day as our men, stiff and cold with exposure and want of
rest, started wearily off down the Jerusalem Plank Road. The road was
almost knee deep in half frozen mud and sleet, the broken planks lay
round in every direction, and as we blundered on through the darkness
that, accompanied by a drizzling rain, soon fell on us, many "a curse
not loud but deep" was vented on Virginia, her roads and her rebels.
Once, and once only did we rest that night, and daylight, or as much
of it as could struggle through a dull, leaden looking sky, found us
at the end of our march, at Hawkin's Tavern, on the Nottoway River,
the scene of the defeat of Kautz and Wilson in their raid during the
summer of '63. And here, for the first time, we learned the nature
and object of our expedition.

The second and fifth corps had started off on a raid along the line
of the Weldon R. R. which they had struck at Jarrett's Station, and
had torn up and destroyed the track from that point to the North
Carolina line, burning the bridge over the Meherrin River, and
pushing on, almost to Weldon. Our mission was to reinforce them and
protect their rear, on the homeward march, if the disposition of the
enemy's force should seem to menace their safety, and we were ordered
to wait at Hawkin's till their rear had passed.

About 3 o'clock the Second Corps passed through our camp and
immediately afterwards the Provisional Brigade was put in motion
and followed them at a rapid rate. About two miles from Hawkin's we
passed through the midst of the 2d corps, camped on each side the
road, but no orders were given us to halt and our command was pushed
on, without a halt and without a rest, until the thirty miles between
us and camp were accomplished. This was the severest marching we
ever undertook, the distance being accomplished in about seven hours
by men in heavy marching order, carrying sixty rounds ammunition
and four days rations, besides their knapsacks and accoutrements,
and chilled and stiffened by exposure to three days and nights very
inclement weather. On our return, in retaliation for the murder of
two of its number by citizens of Sussex county, the 2d corps fired
every house and building along the line of march, from the Nottoway
river to our rear line of works, in front of Petersburg, drove off
large numbers of oxen, sheep, pigs, horses, mules, &c., and brought
in with them a large number of negroes.

After our return to the inside of our lines in front of Petersburg,
we remained for two days in a temporary camp, in rear of the Jones
House, after which we returned to our old camp on the Baxter Road,
where we remained in winter quarters till the opening of the campaign
of '65.




CHAPTER III.

THE CAMPAIGN OF 1865.


Never, since the first gun was fired at Sumter, had the prospects of
the Union cause appeared to be so nearly approximating a triumphant
result, as at the commencement of the year 1865. While the rebels
were daily, and almost hourly, losing all hope and confidence of
success, while, one after another, their avenues of supplies and
munitions of war were being closed to them, while their men, losing
all faith in the promises of their leaders, were deserting daily
by hundreds, and while their legislative assemblies were becoming
disorderly, and disorganized meetings where personal abuse and mutual
recriminations had long since taken the place of orderly and proper
debate,--even the most faint-hearted of those who had the interests
of the nation at heart, had begun to take courage, and to see the
dawn of a brighter day at length approaching. Sherman had made his
triumphant "march to the sea;" Fort Fisher had been captured and the
Cape Fear River, one of the principal blockade running ports, had
thus been effectually closed; Charleston was soon to fall and Sumter
once more bore the old flag aloft.

The rebel press, though arrogant and blatant to the last, in its
gross perversion of facts and its earnest endeavors to convert
any disaster to the Union arms, however trifling, into a great
Confederate victory, gave evident tokens, of a conviction, gradually
growing in force and spreading far and wide through the South, that
the frustration of their schemes was at hand, that secession was
a failure and its days numbered. The Richmond _Whig_, Petersburg
_Express_, and various other papers, tools of the rebel government,
in a series of articles, plausibly and cleverly written and well
calculated to deceive the unlettered masses of the South, claimed
for the South a better condition, than they had known since the
commencement of the war. Their army was reported by them to be well
fed, clothed and sheltered, the spirits and courage of the men to be
excellent and a certain and sure triumph of the Confederate cause,
was prophecied as about to be the result of the commencement of
hostilities, in which Lee would take the initiative in the spring.

On our side of the lines in front of Petersburg, however, a contrary
impression prevailed, and as the winter wore away, even the most
despondent began to cheer up as the hollowness of the Confederacy
became apparent, the most obtuse could see that the beginning of
the end was approaching, and all were looking forward to a speedy
crushing out and final extinction of the last spark of rebellion.

Throughout the whole of the long dreary winter, night after night,
shivering and half famished, miserably clothed, worse fed, and
wretchedly armed, the rebel pickets had deserted their posts and
came into our lines, all telling the same tale of suffering,
deprivation and disaffection. Sometimes singly, sometimes in squads
of three or four, or even greater numbers, they preferred running
their chances of being shot, by our men or their own, to lingering
on, suffering from cold and hunger, with an equal chance of being
eventually either shot or hung. The Army of the Potomac, on the
other hand, which had been comfortably hutted and furnished with the
best of food and clothing, through the winter, had received a large
accession to its numbers, both in recruits and also in convalescents
from the different hospitals; our leisure hours had been passed in
resting from the severe campaign of the preceding year, with drilling
enough to give us exercise, keep us in health, and to render us
more efficient as soldiers. The numerous desertions from the rebels
and the many successive Union victories had instilled confidence in
the minds of our men, just in proportion as it had dispirited and
demoralized the rebels, all felt sure of victory, and that the end
was at hand.

The commencement of the year found the 37th in winter quarters on
the Baxter road, just in front of their old battle field of the 17th
of June, and in rear of Fort Morton. Considerable addition had been
made to our numbers during the winter; a large majority had had an
opportunity of visiting their homes and friends; our casualties had
been few and the health and spirits of the entire regiment were
excellent. With increasing satisfaction, as each day's mail brought
tidings of further Union successes, we watched the net closing
tighter and closer around rebeldom and began to look forward toward
the prospect of a speedy return to our homes.

As the severer rigors of winter passed off, and the mild, warm days
of an early spring began to awaken the vegetable world from its long
sleep, the enemy, who had for some months, been remarkably quiet and
civil, commenced annoying us by assailing us with mortar and Parrott
shells whenever we attempted to indulge in a brigade drill or dress
parade. These exhibitions of animosity, however, beyond driving a few
timid natures to the doubtful security of pine trees and stumps, soon
ceased to create much excitement and served mainly as an excellent
preparation to accustom the ears of our new recruits to the sound
of these missiles. Nobody ever got hurt by them, and nobody cared
much for them. In the month of March we were visited by several
severe tornadoes which threw down a number of the trees, among which
our camp was built, and, on one occasion, killed one man, Corporal
Kenneday of company F.

And so the time wore on, till at length an order came "one fine
day" for all Sutlers to go to the base at City Point, for officers
and men to turn in all their superfluous winter clothing, and for
all arms and ammunition to be thoroughly inspected. The Army of the
Potomac was stripping for the fight. Again a few days and rumors,
undefined and indistinct at first, but gaining plausibility as time
passed on, began to circulate through our camps that "Sheridan had
come." And sure enough, one fine summer-like spring morning, three
or four wild, rough-looking individuals mounted on lean, but tough
wiry animals, rode into our camp, clothed in Confederate uniform,
and on being seized and questioned, declared themselves, not without
a certain pride in so doing, to be "scouts in the service of General
Sheridan." In confirmation, they pointed to a long line of dust, in
rear of our camp, where, with the aid of our field glasses, we could
dimly discern a large column of cavalry filing slowly along towards
the left, in full view of the enemy and within range of his guns,
proudly, defiantly, as if the mere fact of their being Sheridan's
men, were a safeguard in itself.

This looked like business, and we prepared ourselves accordingly,
remaining for the next three weeks in a continued state of excitement
and expectation. On one occasion we thought the fun had commenced,
a succession of loud cheers, or rather yells, accompanied by rapid
and continued firing from the picket line on our left, leading us to
suppose that Gen. Lee had opened the ball by taking the initiative
himself, and was about to try the strength of our position. We were
quickly under arms, and drawn up in line of battle, in the rear of
Fort Morton, ready to move, wherever fate and the commanding general
might choose to send us. Having waited there for an hour or two, and
the disturbance, which turned out to be nothing more than a mere
picket _emeute_, having gradually quieted down, we were permitted to
return in peace to our camp.

But more stirring scenes in the drama were at hand, time was rolling
along, and the 25th of March and 2d of April were approaching. The
rebellion, which the most sanguine of us never expected to end
before July, was even then tottering to its fall, and a few weeks
more were to see its final overthrow.

Ever since the nocturnal picket skirmish, I have mentioned above, the
general commanding the division had impressed on us the necessity of
exercising an extra amount of vigilance and caution; trench guards
were doubled, the constant supervision of the picket line and reports
as to the vigilance and efficiency of officers and men on duty
there, were rendered an imperative part of the duties of the brigade
officer of the day; brigade and regimental commanders exercised, in
most cases, a sleepless and cat-like supervision of everything that
occurred within the rebel lines, within their scope of observation;
the signal man on the Avery House waved his flags and lanterns,
frantically, day and night; our days were spent with field glasses
and telescopes stuck to our eyes as if they grew there, and our
night's rest was broken by orders sent round three or four times a
night exacting the observance of the greatest vigilance or demanding
information as to the movements of the enemy.

Our position became like that of "Sister Ann" in Bluebeard's tower
and the part of Fatima, was, as the play bills say, "ably sustained"
by our commanding generals, in their perpetual demands, as to whether
"We saw anybody coming?"

On the morning of the 25th of March we were aroused from such
restless sleep as we were in the habit of taking in those days, by
the sound of three shots fired in rapid succession from the rebel
lines, and quickly followed by a scattering fire of musketry. A very
few minutes sufficed for the donning of arms and accoutrements, and
in less time than it takes to read this page, we were under arms and
awaiting orders.

Meantime the batteries on either side had opened and were keeping up
a very lively interchange of missiles; close on our right the second
brigade was evidently warmly engaged, as a lively musketry fire,
enlivened once in a while with the report of a heavy gun, testified.
The morning was dull and cloudy and nothing had yet occurred to
enable us to form any conclusion as to what was on hand, but, after
a few minutes we were ordered down to the right of the brigade and
drawn up on the flank, at right angles to the main line of works, and
here we began to gather an inkling of the facts of the case.

Right in our front, on an eminence on the opposite side of a ravine,
on one side of which we lay snugly ensconced behind a light line
of works, was Fort Steadman, a large and very strong work built on
Hare Hill, the spot where we had encamped nearly a year ago, just
after the battle of the 18th of June. In and around this a fierce
fight was going on, and to the rear of it were to be seen flashes,
indicating that sharp skirmishing was going on in the direction of
Meade Station, The truth was at once apparent. Massing his forces
under cover of the night and taking advantage of the darkness of the
morning and the close proximity of our lines, the enemy had driven in
our picket line, surprised the garrison of the fort and captured it,
and was now pushing for the City Point Railroad, and, perhaps, City
Point itself, in fact _our lines were broken_.

By the time we had arrived at this conclusion, which was anything but
a pleasant one, the firing in our rear had increased considerably,
and daylight having at length fairly asserted its supremacy, we could
see the rebel troops falling rapidly back into Fort Steadman. It had
also become sufficiently light for our artillery to get the range
and open on the fort, which they were now doing with a will, making
their pieces speak with vigor and much to the purpose. This fact
the rebels seemed fully to appreciate and regulated the duration of
their second visit to the fort to a merely _passing_ one, passing
right through and over the parapet on the other side, back to their
own lines as fast as possible. The cause of their retreat was soon
apparent. Just as they commenced leaving, the third division of the
9th corps, under Brevet Major General Hartranft, appeared coming up
over the edge of the ravine, advancing in line of battle in excellent
order, and with the General at their head leading the charge. On they
go, unbroken and unwavering, leaving here and there a man on the
field, but never stopping or faltering. The "Johnnies" don't like the
look of things, they evidently think they are in a tight place, "and
have waked up the wrong passenger." And so they take their leave,
_piling_ over the parapets and swarming back to their lines like bees
from a hive, leaving behind them hundreds of their dead and wounded,
ten battle flags and any quantity of arms and accoutrements. A great
number prefer taking their chances of a Union prison to facing Union
bullets, and throwing away their arms, sneak in under cover of our
breastworks and surrender themselves as prisoners of war. Meanwhile
the 3d division has occupied Fort Steadman, the firing has ceased and
the 37th goes home to breakfast, having for the first and only time
been disengaged spectators of a battle.

The regiment suffered no loss in this affair, as although exposed
to some shelling, it was not directly engaged with any portion of
the enemy's forces, remaining on the field solely for the purpose of
covering the right flank and rear of the 1st brigade.

The next week was passed in an uneasy, ominous state of comparative
quiet, the lull that always precedes a storm of any kind whatever,
broken by occasional rumors and reports, and sundry turnings out at
unseasonable hours of the day and night. At length, on the evening of
Saturday, the 1st of April, our chief, suspecting that Lee was about
to evacuate, directed our batteries to feel the enemy's line, so as
to find out, if possible, whether he had withdrawn his artillery or
not. About half past ten the performance commenced, and the 37th was
ordered to fall in, as usual, and move down to the support of our
picket line.

Shortly after we had moved out of camp, the enemy began replying with
his mortars, showing that these, at least, had not been removed,
and, from their fire, one of our men was wounded as we marched down
the new covered way leading to our picket line. We soon got into
position in a deep valley or ravine, just in the rear of our picket
line, and there, for about three hours, were witnesses of one of
the most sublime and terrific spectacles of the war. Every gun and
every mortar along the whole length of the two opposing lines was,
by this time, fairly in action, and the various missiles, plainly to
be traced in their course through the air, by the train of sparks
from the burning fuse, were crossing one another at every angle and
in every direction. Watching this grand pyrotechnic display from
a secure and tolerably comfortable position, time passed rapidly
enough, till about half past twelve, on the morning of Sunday,
the 2d of April, when, the firing having gradually died away, we
were ordered to march out by the left flank and report at Brigade
Headquarters.

Arriving here, we were quickly joined by the 8th and 27th Michigan,
38th Wisconsin, and 109th New York, the 51st Pennsylvania, with a
company from each of the other regiments, being left to take care of
the picket line on our brigade front. After a short delay, we moved
rapidly off towards the left, and about an hour before daylight were
formed in line of battle in Fort Sedgwick, or, as it is better known,
"Fort Hell," the business that brought us there being to support
a charge that our 3d Division was about to make on Fort Mahone,
otherwise known as "Fort Damnation."

These works bore the reputation of being the strongest and most
formidable on the two lines, and it was with rather dubious feelings
that we waited for the signal to advance, and the words of Brutus:

            --"Oh that a man might know
      The end of this day's business, e're it come!
      But it sufficeth, that the day will end,
      And the end is known."

occurred to many of us, probably more than once, through the course
of the eventful day that was just beginning to dawn. At last the
order is given, and silently and rapidly, just as the first grey
streaks of dawn begin to shine in the east, we see the dusky forms
file out past us into the open field beyond the fort. Then our turn
comes next, and away we go with orders to keep as far to the left as
we can get. On we go, grape, canister and case shot whistling round
us in every direction, over a cornfield with the dried stalks still
standing--over our picket line--across a small marshy run--"this must
be the rebel picket line!" "hullo, there's a dead Johnny!" and in
another minute we have retaliated on the rebels for their attack of
the 25th of March, and Fort Mahone and two or three hundred yards of
the rebel works are in possession of the 1st Brigade, 1st Division of
the 9th Army Corps.

At daylight, we discover that during the darkness and confusion, two
companies of our regiment have separated somewhat from the rest, and
are lying in Fort Mahone, while the remainder of the regiment lie a
little to the right of that work. We hold our position all through
that day, while fighting is going on on each side of us, from the
Appomattox to the extreme left, and away round to the Five-forks,
where Wright and Sheridan are busy at work. But we have no time to
think of what is going on, on either side of us, events in our own
neighborhood demand all our attention. Several times, in the course
of the day, the rebels attempt to regain the fort, and as often we
send them back till the hillside in our front is thick with dead and
dying.

And so the 2d of April draws to a close, the rebel line is broken and
the city of Petersburg is, virtually, ours. All that night we pass,
under arms, in the rebel works, and at daylight on the 3d, advance in
line of battle, not a shot from the enemy to check our progress--we
can see the cannon remaining in several of the forts, but where are
the gunners?

      "Did traitors lurk in the _rebel_ hold?
      Had their hands grown stiff or their hearts grown cold?
      I know not in sooth, but from yonder wall
      There flashed no fire, there hissed no ball."
                       --_Siege of Corinth._

and now we are up to the second line of works, they are silent and
empty, and Gen. Hartranft, commanding the 3d Division of our Corps,
jumps astride of the 8-inch Columbiad, which, a week or two before,
had shelled his headquarters in the Avery House, and which he had
sworn he would "straddle."

And now the fact becomes evident, _Petersburg is evacuated_. We break
from line of battle into column, and dipping down into a ravine we
see, as we mount the hill on the other side, the cockade city lying
stretched out at our feet, the goal we have been striving for, for
almost a year, is won, and Petersburg is ours.

It seems strange and dream-like, at first, to stand there and look
down, at close quarters, on the spires and cupolas that for many
a long month we have watched from a distance, and to trace their
connections, with the buildings of which they formed a part, in
reality, instead of only in imagination, as before.

Yes, there it lay before us looking, somehow, strangely civilized
and peaceful with its old fashioned steep-roofed houses nestled down
amongst the trees, the smoke from the chimneys curling upwards into
the bright blue sky overhead--a crowd of darkies "Hurrahing and
Hallelujahing" around us, accompanying their expressions of delight
with a grotesque exhibition of antics and grimaces, and "_Bressing_
de Lord and the Yankees," about alike, for the freedom that had
this day come to them. And now as the light gets stronger, we see
the colors of the 2d Michigan waving from the Court House, and
the strains of a brass band come floating down the wind faint and
indistinct in the distance. But a note here and there is sufficient
to show that it is a salute to the flag that waves over the captured
city, and, as the well-known strains of the "Star Spangled Banner"
fall clearer and clearer on the ear, our own flags are "unfurled to
the glad breeze of heaven," and a cheer goes up to greet them, that
awakens the echoes of the city far and wide.

We sit down under the shade of the locust trees and discuss a hasty
breakfast, when the word is given, "Fall in," and we march back to
camp, to bid farewell to the spot that, for nearly six months, has
been our only home, to pack up our Lares and Penates and transporting
them, like Ulysses, (not Grant, but him of Troy) on our back, start
off in pursuit of the rebel army, or wherever it may please Grant to
send us.

The same evening the brigade was moved out on to the Boydton
Plankroad where the men were allowed a brief rest after a week of
duty, which had pretty well tired us all out, both officers and men.
It is true that we had had little or no marching, and only one day's
fighting, but the continual state of tension in which our nerves
were kept all that time, and the want of rest, made us all glad of a
respite from our labors.

We remained camped near the city till the 6th of the month, Col.
Ely, commanding 2d brigade, 1st division, 9th army corps, being
appointed Military Governor of the same, Brevet Major General Wilcox,
commanding the district. We found the inhabitants, for the most part,
orderly and well disposed, though a few cases of outrage towards our
troops occurred which were as much deprecated and resented by the
more orderly and well behaved portion of the community, as by us.



PETERSBURG is a remarkably neat and pretty city, situated on the
Appomattox River, about ten miles above its confluence with the
James at City Point. Before the war it contained somewhere in the
neighborhood of twenty thousand inhabitants, though at the time
of our occupation of it, its population scarcely numbered over
fifteen thousand. It was originally a trading post, established by
one Peters, for traffic with the Indians, and in process of time,
and as the country became settled, became a place of trade for the
settlers in the vicinity. The original town was located about where
the cemetery at Blandford now stands, and for a time, was known as
Peter's, afterwards as Pocahontas, this latter name being still given
to a hamlet across the river, forming a suburb of the city. The name
was finally changed to Petersburg which it retains to this day; it
is situated principally in Dinwiddie county, and is the principal
tobacco shipping point in the South. The neighboring counties of
Prince George and Pocahontas, have a fertile, highly productive
soil, raising corn, tobacco, sugar-cane and cotton as well as wheat,
barley, oats and other cereals. It has railroad communications with
Richmond, distant twenty-five miles, Burkesville sixty miles, Weldon,
N. C., seventy-five miles, Norfolk and Suffolk sixty-three miles, and
a short railroad also connects it with City Point, its port of entry,
to which place there is easy access, from the coast, for vessels
drawing fifteen feet of water.

There are several large cotton, flour, and lumber mills erected on
the rapids of the Appomattox, which furnish an unequalled water
power, as yet only partially developed, and a proper attention paid
to which would largely increase the wealth and importance of the
place. The streets are wide and straight, nicely ornamented with
shade trees, and the public buildings, for the most part, well
designed and well finished. In hotels the city is rather deficient,
there being but one decent one, the Jarrett House, in the whole
place. Sycamore street, the principal business street of the city,
contains a few fine buildings and stores, and quite a number of
handsome residences.

The stores were mostly closed on our arrival, and but few of them had
much of a stock on hand, Confederate scrip having for a long time
been quoted "low" and the supply scant. On the Saturday preceding
the Monday on which we arrived in the city, flour had been sold at
$1,400 a barrel, wood $50 a cord and other necessaries of life in
proportion. The lower part of the city bore severe traces of the
siege, hardly a house being unmarked by either shot or shell. The gas
works were nearly torn to pieces, a long chimney, eighty-five feet
in height, which had once formed part of the building, having been
thrown down a short time before our arrival, after having received
thirty-five shells through it in different places. The clock on the
Town Hall had also been perforated by a three inch shell, though
strange to say, the missile had not damaged the works in the least.
Two bridges across the Appomattox and three large warehouses full of
tobacco, had been set on fire and destroyed by the rebels when they
evacuated. A fine strong bridge leading across the river, from the
South Side railroad depot to the railway company's machine shop, had
been loaded with two new locomotives and all the cars that could be
placed on it, and then set fire to, cars and locomotives being thus
precipitated into the river.

A large quantity of commissary stores, consisting of corn meal,
bacon, coffee, (unroasted,) sugar and tobacco, was found in the rebel
government warehouses and were afterwards issued to the destitute
citizens, irrespective of color. Captain John Cooper, of the 5th
Wisconsin, was appointed C. S., and the scene in his office, from
daylight till dark, was a novel one.

Ladies of the first family type, clothed in deepest black, with a
sullen, defiant look on their handsome faces, sometimes closely
veiled; Africa, of all shades, from the genuine sable "mungo," with
skin like polished ebony, and showing from between his extended
gums a formidable array of ivory, to the graceful quadroon, hardly
a shade darker, and very often a great deal handsomer than her late
mistress, standing within a few feet of one another, all jubilant and
triumphant, all rejoicing in their new found freedom, kind and polite
to the boys in blue, their liberators, and obsequious, to a degree,
to shoulder straps. Poor things, what their future may be, we know
not, but they can never know a happier day in their lives, than when,
there on the third of April, 1865, the fetters fell from their hands,
as from Paul and Silas in prison, and they stood, for the first time
in their lives, free men and women.

On the 6th of April, the 1st division, 9th army corps, was relieved
from duty in Petersburg, and moved out on the line of the South Side
Railroad, having its headquarters at Burkesville, and the corps being
strung along the road from that place to Petersburg. The 37th moved
out at daylight and camped about dark near Ford's Station, from
whence they were afterwards removed to beyond Wellsville and in the
neighborhood of Black's and White's, where they remained till after
the surrender of Lee and Johnston and their armies, guarding the
railroad and the farms and plantations adjoining, and administering,
as far as our commissariat would permit, to the wants of the adjacent
population.

Overrun and devastated by two contending armies, the once rich
country, surrounding Petersburg and Richmond, is to-day a wilderness.
Not only have the crops been swept off to supply the wants of the
Confederate soldiers, but the cattle and horses have been also
absorbed for the same purpose. Fences have been torn down and burnt,
houses, sheds and barns stripped of their coverings to furnish huts
for winter quarters, and the whole country converted into a scene of
devastation and ruin. Deserters from both armies have formed bands
of guerrillas for the purposes of plunder and pillage, men from the
opposing armies having in some cases associated together for this
purpose.

A rather amusing incident of this kind which occurred whilst we
were near Black's and White's, may serve as an illustration. Col.
Harriman, having been informed that large body of guerrillas had
formed a camp in his neighborhood, sent Capt. Burnett, A. D. C.
on his staff, accompanied by a sufficient force, to reconnoitre
and report on the condition of affairs. The Captain set out on his
expedition and soon arrived in sight of the enemy, (?) whom he found
to consist of about a couple of hundred colored individuals camped
in due form, and with camp guards, &c., duly posted. The _commanding
officer_ was a private of the 5th Mass. Colored Cavalry, who had, by
some means or other, strayed from his command, and had, like David,
"gathered to him every one (of his color) that was in distress and
every one that was discontented," and had established a camp in
regular military style.

The sable chieftain sat at his tent door as the Captain approached,
and while one intelligent son of Africa was carefully cleaning his
master's (?) horse, another highly intellectual contraband was
blacking his boots. The scene was a rich one and might be taken for
the frontispiece of Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe's next novel. The
terms of capitulation were not, we believe, quite as ceremonious nor
so advantageous as those agreed on between Gens. Grant and Lee, for
poor Cuffee was sent back to his regiment under arrest, and his sable
warriors who belonged to the neighboring plantations dispersed to
their homes, and their arms, which they had collected from the battle
field of the Five Forks, turned over to Uncle Sam.

Whilst camped here the sad news reached us of the brutal
assassination of President Lincoln by the wretched maniac, Booth, and
I say maniac, not to palliate his crime, but because his act was one
none but a maniac would have committed. For, however much he may have
sympathized with the Southern cause and hated its fancied oppressors,
he might have known that such an expression of malignity and revenge,
even though sanctioned by the Confederate government, as after events
have shown it was, would, as it in fact has, crush out all sympathy
for the rebellion, at home and abroad, and extinguish the last
sentiment of pity for what its partisans have been pleased to call
their heroic resistance against superior numbers.

The effect the news of the assassination had on the army may be
imagined, but cannot be described. In the midst of our rejoicings at
the successes which had so lately crowned our efforts, and while the
praises and acclamations of the North were yet ringing in our ears,
it fell on us like a thunderbolt. Just as the dawn of peace, crowning
the long and arduous labors of the past four years, was beginning
to illuminate his pathway, in the very zenith of his career and at
the height of his fame, our good, kind President was ruthlessly and
brutally murdered. There is no need here to eulogize those virtues,
so well known to all who have watched so anxiously and with such
interest the successive acts of his career, nor to enlarge on that
stubborn honesty and integrity of purpose and principle which has
brought this nation safely through a sea of troubles which well nigh
overwhelmed it. Abraham Lincoln has gone to his account, and the
tears of a nation that honored him whilst living, follow him to the
grave, now that he is dead. The loss is ours, not his; he has died at
his post with his harness on his back; he has laid down his life for
the country he loved more than life itself, a soldier in the cause of
humanity, freedom and right, and what could man wish more. Peace to
his soul! When the time comes for us to go, may our record, if not as
glorious, be at least as clear as his.


REUNION.

[_From the London Spectator._]

      An end at last! The echoes of the war--
        The weary war beyond the western waves--
      Die in the distance. Freedom's rising star
        Beacons above a hundred thousand graves:

      The graves of heroes who have won the fight,
        Who in the storming of the stubborn town
      Have rung the marriage peal of might and right,
        And scaled the cliffs and cast the dragon down.

      Pæans of armies thrill across the sea,
        Till Europe answers--"Let the struggle cease,
      The bloody page is turned; the next may be
        For ways of pleasantness and paths of peace!"--

      A golden morn--a dawn of better things--
        The olive-branch--clasping of hands again--
      A noble lesson read to conquering kings--
        A sky that tempests had not scoured in vain.

      This from America we hoped and him
        Who ruled her "in the spirit of his creed."
      Does the hope last when all our eyes are dim,
        As History records her darkest deed?

      The pilot of his people through the strife,
        With his strong purpose turning scorn to praise,
      E'en at the close of battle reft of life,
        And fair inheritance of quiet days.

      Defeat and triumph found him calm and just,
        He showed how clemency should temper power,
      And dying left to future times in trust
        The memory of his brief victorious hour.

      O'ermastered by the irony of fate,
        The last and greatest martyr of his cause;
      Slain like Achilles at the Scæan gate,
        He saw the end, and fixed "the purer laws."

      May these endure and, as his work, attest
        The glory of his honest heart and hand--
      The simplest, and the bravest, and the best--
        The Moses and the Cromwell of his land.

      Too late the pioneers of modern spite,
        Awe-stricken by the universal gloom.
      See his name lustrous in Death's sable night,
        And offer tardy tribute at his tomb.

      But we who have been with him all the while,
        Who knew his worth, and loved him long ago,
      Rejoice that in the circuit of our isle
        There is no room at last for Lincoln's foe.

The surrender of Lee and Johnston with their entire armies, put an
end to the rebellion in Virginia, and left the Army of the Potomac,
for the first time in four years, out of employment, with no one to
fight and looking round for some one to hit or to "tread on the tail
of its coat." Such things could not last, so on the 20th of April
we had orders to pack up and move from our camp on the South Side
railroad to City Point, there to take transports for Washington. This
we accordingly did, and after a tiresome march, arrived at City Point
on the morning of the 22d.

A few hours sufficed for all necessary arrangements, and before
evening the steamer _Daniel Webster_, having on board Col. Harriman
and staff, Gen. Humphries of the 2d corps, and the 37th and 38th
Wisconsin, was steaming slowly down the James river against a strong
flood tide. We passed Harrison's Landing, where the 9th corps crossed
the James on pontoons in its march from Cold Harbor to Petersburg,
during the summer of last year, and just below this point, the last
rays of the setting sun were shining on the glorious old stars and
stripes floating proudly over Fort Powhattan, the strongest work on
the James river. Our boat having no regular government pilot, was
compelled to anchor shortly after dark, and wait till morning and
daylight should enable us to pick our way along the mazy channel. We
passed Fortress Monroe with its "even trench" and frowning embrasures
about sunrise, and steamed out through Hampton Roads, past that
singularly amphibious locality, part fort, part prison, known as the
Rip Raps, into the smooth waters of Chesapeake Bay. The morning was
still and pleasant, a light breeze from the northwest created just
enough swell to give an easy rise and fall to the vessel, enough
to make us feel that we were at sea, and hardly enough to unsettle
the internal arrangements of the least nautical of our passengers.
Far away on the starboard bow, Capes Charles and Henry were just
visible, faint blue streaks in the distant offing. Astern of us were
Norfolk, Fortress Monroe, the Rip Raps, several Men of War, including
two British and one French steam frigate, and several saucy looking
Yankee gunboats, bustling round in a great hurry, making a great
swell in the water and a great noise with their escaping steam, as
if they had important government business on hand and were anxious
to get through with it. Schooners, barques and sloops of all sizes,
builds and styles were either dropping easily down before the light
wind, their big fore-and-aft sails boomed out on either side and
giving them the appearance, as they rose and fell on the swells, of
sea-birds, perched on the water, with their wings spread ready to
take flight, or with sheets flat aft were working up the bay, passing
and repassing one another as they tacked and tacked again. And the
huge steam frigates lay there quiet, and, as it seemed, disdainful
watchers of the whole scene, models of order and neatness from truck
to deck, every rope taut and in its place, every spar and every
line clear and distinct against the blue sky behind them, the black
muzzles of the guns with their white tompions all in even line, and
the boats at the swinging boom, each with its boat-tender aboard to
keep it from chafing and rubbing against its neighbor--everything
orderly, methodical, neat. (And here a moral. What a pity some people
in this world cannot, like a man-of-war's boat, be furnished with
a boat-tender, to keep the waves of envy and unfriendliness from
causing them to chafe against their fellows.)

But ethics and moralizing have but little to do with the 1st
brigade, 1st division, 9th army corps, and still less with the
good ship _Daniel Webster_, which, about this time, was bowling
along up the bay, at the rate of ten knots an hour. About noon we
passed the light-ship on Wolf Trap Shoals, with the _tin-clad_
lying alongside, to protect her from guerrillas. For, the inference
being but fair that those fiends, who would not hesitate to destroy
a train containing innocent women and children, would have as
little compunction in destroying the often-times only friend of
the storm-beaten ship, in her most thrilling hours of danger, all
the light-houses and light-vessels along the coast of Virginia
are strongly guarded, day and night. Just before dark, we entered
the mouth of the Potomac, and, in obedience to a hail from the
guard-ship, at Port Washington, made fast to the dock at Alexandria,
at sunrise, on the morning of the 24th. Here we disembarked, and were
marched out to a very pleasant camping-ground, on the line of the
Orange and, Alexandria railroad. We remained here two days, when we
received orders to march to Washington. Thither we accordingly went,
and the evening of the same day found us encamped near Tenallytown,
between Forts Gaines and Simmons, and not far from the Chain Bridge.
Here we remained, "possessing our souls in peace," and doing a little
picket duty, a little drilling, not a little dress-parading, and, in
fact, playing soldiers; with nothing to do, and all day to do it in;
and, barring a slight suspicion of monotony, leading a not unpleasant
life.

On Tuesday evening, May 9th, we had a very pleasant reunion, at
brigade headquarters, the occasion being the presentation to Col.
Harriman, by the officers of his staff, of a very handsome sword. The
presentation was made, in the name of the staff, by Capt. Charles
McCreery, 8th Michigan Volunteers, Inspector General, who in a very
neat and appropriate speech descanted on the pleasant nature of the
relations that had always existed between the Colonel and his staff,
officially and otherwise, during the long time he had commanded the
brigade, and speaking in terms of the warmest commendation of the
able and efficient manner in which the Colonel had commanded the
brigade both in camp and in action. The Colonel responded, briefly
and to the purpose, and after an hour or so spent in social chat
the party broke up, pleased and gratified at the opportunity that
had been afforded them of showing their appreciation of an able and
gallant officer.

When the last grand pageant of the war passed through the streets of
the capital, and the army, that for the last four years, had been
laboring to maintain the existence of the country and to uphold its
chosen form of government, received a sincere and hearty public
welcome at the hands of a grateful people. Our regiment took a part
in the pageant and received its share of the welcome. For two days,
Washington was the scene of a military display, the like of which the
world has never seen, and God grant may never have occasion to see
again. From nine in the morning till three in the afternoon of each
day, Pennsylvania Avenue, from the Capitol to Georgetown, was covered
with troops, as the armies of the Potomac, Tennessee and Georgia
passed along through crowds of their fellow citizens who had turned
out to welcome them home.

The long wide street, with its shady sidewalks and handsome
buildings, was dressed in its gayest. The fresh spring verdure of the
trees, the glorious stripes and stars waving everywhere, the bright
glancing bayonets, set off by the dark blue of their bearers, the
regimental colors and guidons, the waving of flags and handkerchiefs
from every window, the lively strains of the various brigade and
regimental bands, the bright clear sky and sun overhead, formed a
sight once seen, never to be forgotten, and worth ten years of a
man's life for him to be able to say, "I was there."

But the details of this brilliant military panorama are now history,
so suffice it to say that the 37th contributed their part to the show
and received their welcome from the Washingtonians and their friends.

On the afternoon of the 25th of May, the 1st brigade was reviewed
by Colonel Harriman and a large party of distinguished visitors,
guests of Colonel H's. The party included Governor Lewis, Gen.
Lucius Fairchild, Gen. Gaylord, Brev. Brig. Gen. C. Fairchild,
Governor Crapo of Michigan, Major Chas. Hamlin, son of the late Vice
President, and his sister, Mrs. Bachelor, Col. Proudfit of Wisconsin,
Mrs. Gen. Fairchild, and a large delegation of civilians and soldiers
from Michigan and Wisconsin.

The review was preceded by brigade dress parade, followed by a
short drill, after which the ranks were opened and Col. Harriman,
accompanied by the two Governors, Gens. Fairchild and Gaylord, rode
along the front and rear of the line, the ranks were then closed and
the brigade, having formed column by company, marched past in review.
Great praise was awarded for the accuracy and regularity with which
the whole affair passed off, by all present, both civil and military.

At our camp in Tenallytown we remained without any occurrence of
moment coming to break the monotony of our lives, daily expecting an
order to return home, and daily being disappointed.

The orders mustering out all men sick in hospital and all whose term
of service expired before October 1st, 1865, reduced us much in
number, and an effort was made to consolidate the 38th with us.

In the early part of July an order, directing the consolidation to
take place, was received, but was again countermanded, in consequence
of an order from the War Department to muster out the whole 9th corps.

Some reason or the other, no doubt a good and sufficient one, delayed
the order, however, for some time on its passage from the Adjutant
General's office in Washington, causing no little grumbling and a
great many _curse_-ory remarks from our men. It came at length, and
on the morning of July 26th, at 10 A. M., the 37th Wisconsin, after
having served for nearly half its original term of enlistment, and
having spent most of that time in active and arduous campaigning,
ceased to belong to the service of the United States. The same
evening, transportation having been duly furnished us, we took the
cars on the Baltimore and Ohio railroad for Baltimore. A detachment
of the 38th Wisconsin and the 27th Michigan occupied the same train
as we did, and as we rolled out of the depot a cheer went up from the
forty-three cars, of which our train was composed, that wakened the
echoes far and near.

From Baltimore we took the Pennsylvania railroad for Pittsburg, where
the Ladies' Aid Society gave us a most hospitable reception. From
Pittsburg, through the winding glens of Pennsylvania, and over the
teeming fields of Ohio, till at length, tired, dusty, and hungry,
at two o'clock in the morning we sweep into the evergreen city of
Cleveland.

Here too, the ladies, God bless them, are on hand with a first rate
breakfast ready and waiting for us. After a short delay we embarked
on board the _Morning Star_, and made a quick and pleasant run across
Lake Erie and through the St. Clair river, till at length we cited
the old fashioned looking buildings of Sandwich and Windsor, looking
sleepily and wonderingly at the bustling, lively aspect of their
opposite neighbor, Detroit.

Here we came in for a share of the kind and hearty welcome that
awaited the 27th Michigan, and here we took leave of that regiment.
For over a year we had served in the same brigade; for over a year
the 37th "Badgers" and 27th "Wolverines" had toiled, marched and
fought side by side. And it was with mutual feelings of esteem
and regret that in the streets of Detroit we parted with our old
companions in arms. Many a hearty good-bye and God speed you were
exchanged and many promises of correspondence given and received, and
soon the cars whirled us on, through the night, to where the ladies
of Grand Haven had a good breakfast ready for us, where they greeted
us with a hearty welcome,

      "and hands that offer fruit and flowers,"

There too, was McBride, prince of Captains, and the famous old
_Detroit_, and with such favorable conjunction of boat and captain,
our run across the lake was safely and expeditiously accomplished.

A hearty welcome met us at the City of Bricks, and our greeting, on
our return to our State, was all that could be desired. We arrived
at Madison about 4 o'clock in the afternoon of Monday, July 31st,
were entertained at the Railroad Depot at the expense of the State,
and were welcomed in the park around the Capitol by the Governor,
Secretary of State, Adjutant General and the Municipal authorities
of Madison. The Regiment was then furloughed for fifteen days with
orders to report, at the expiration of that time, at Camp Randall.

And here we will leave them at the point from which they started,
welcomed back to a country jubilant and exultant in a peace they
themselves had helped to win, rejoicing themselves in the prospect of
seeing home and friends once more.

And even as now, when their warfare is accomplished and the victory
won, we gladly sheath the sword and lay aside the musket, so if the
old Badger State ever again calls on her sons to stand forth in her
defence, none will respond more readily than the

THIRTY-SEVENTH WISCONSIN INFANTRY.




TABLE

SHOWING GAIN AND LOSS

OF

Thirty-Seventh Wisconsin Volunteers

DURING CAMPAIGNS OF 1864 AND 1865.


COMPANY.

  ------------------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---++------
                    | A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | K ||
  Original strength | 83| 83| 83| 83| 82| 80| 83| 81| 80| 80||  818
  Recruits {1864    |  1|   |  1|  7|  5|  5|   |  2|   |   ||   21
           {1865    |  9|   |  2|  5|  8|  8| 11|  6|  7|  7||   63
  Draft    {1863    |   |   |  1|   |   |   |   |   |   |   ||    1
           {1864    | 13| 18| 15| 17| 14|  7| 16| 21|  8|  8||  157
  Substitutes       |  3|  8|  3|  1|  4|  4|  8|   | 16| 10||   57
                    |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|| ----
      Total         |109|109|105|113|113|104|118|110|111|105|| 1097

LOSS.

  By death          | 18| 22| 18| 20| 27| 28| 24| 21| 16| 22||  216
  By discharge      |  6|  6| 13| 11| 10| 19|  4| 12| 24| 10||  115
  By transfer to    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   ||
    V. R. C.        |   |  3|   |  4|  3|  2|  2|  4|   |  1||   19
  By desertion      |  4|  2|  1|  0|  1|  0|  5|  2|  7|  6||   28
                    |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|| ----
      Total         | 28| 33| 32|*38| 41| 49| 35| 39| 47| 39||  378

COMMISSIONED OFFICERS--FIELD AND STAFF.

  Original strength |  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  3|  9||
  Killed and died   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   ||
    of wounds       |  1|  1|  1|  1|  1|   |   |   |   |  2|   ||   7
  Died of disease   |  1|   |   |  1|   |   |   |   |   |   |   ||   2
  Resigned          |   |   |  1|   |  1|   |   |  1|   |  1|  3||   7
  Discharged        |   |  1|  1|   |  1|   |  2|  1|   |   |   ||   6
  Dismissed         |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |  1|   |   ||   1
  Mustered out      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |  1|   |  2||   3
                    |---|---|---| --|---|---|---|---|---|---|---||----
      Total loss    |  2|  2|  3|  2|  3|   |  2|  2|  2|  3|  5||  26
  ------------------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---++----

    * Including three men transferred to the 38th Wis. Vol. Inf.




  ORIGINAL ROSTER
  OF FIELD, STAFF AND LINE OFFICERS
  37TH WISCONSIN VOL. INF'TRY.

  COLONEL.
  SAM. HARRIMAN.
  Promoted Brevet Brig. Gen., July 1865.

  LIEUT. COLONEL.
  ANSON. O. DOOLITTLE.
  Resigned Sept. 7th, 1864.

  MAJOR.
  WM. J. KERSHAW.
  Promoted Lieut. Col. Sept. 27, 1864; resigned Oct. 18, 1864.

  ADJUTANT.
  CLARON I. MILTIMORE.
  Promoted Brevet Captain, July, 1865.

  QUARTERMASTER.
  WM. C. WEBB.
  Promoted to Colonel 52d Wis. Vols.

  SURGEON.
  D. C. ROUNDY.

  FIRST ASST. SURGEON.
  GEORGE H. CALKINS.
  Mustered out March 11th, 1864.

  SECOND ASST. SURGEON.
  JOHN HENRY ORRICK.
  Promoted 1st Asst., March 11th, 1864.

  CHAPLAIN.
  LEWIS M. HAWES.
  Resigned March 1865.

  NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF.

  _Principal Musician_--W. H. BURTON.

  _Commissary Sergeant_--N. G. ROWLEY. Prom. 2d Lieut. Co.
  Dec. 29, 1864.

  _Quartermaster Sergeant_--N. B. PRENTISS. Prom. Regimental Q. M.

  _Hospital Steward_--PORTER M. ROUNDY.

  _Sergeant Major_--GEO. GRAHAM. Prom. 1st Lt. Co. G, Dec. 29, 1864.


MUSTER ROLL OF "A" COMPANY.

  Raised in Wood, Juneau, and Dane counties, by SAM. STEVENS and S.
  JONES. Mustered into U. S. service at Madison, Wisconsin, April
  16th, 1864.

_Captain._

  SAMUEL STEVENS. Killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  SANFORD JONES. Died in hospital, Aug. 18th, 1864; promoted
  Captain, July 18th, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  DANIEL A. LOWBER. Wounded, June 18th, 1864; promoted 1st Lieut.,
  July 28th, Captain, Sept. 27th, 1864.

_Sergeants._

  Theo. M. Hobby, promoted 2d Lieut., July 18th; discharged, Dec.
  22d, 1863.

  Oliver H. Hunt, died in hospital, Dec. 16th, 1864.

  Francis A. Barnard, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864, and
  discharged, March 8th, 1865.

  Wm. Cobban, wounded in action, July 30th, and discharged, January
  2d, 1865.

  Ferdinand Herber, reduced to ranks, July 15th; wounded in action,
  July 30th, 1864.

_Corporals._

  Nelson H. Carney, reduced to ranks, July 1st, 1864.

  Irvine J. Slattery, wounded in action, June 18th; promoted
  Sergt., Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Edw. Z. Weed.

  Tim. E. Wade, died in hospital, Nov. 7th, 1864.

  Benj. F. Wheeler, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Jesse B. Hake.

  Willis B. Moffatt.

  Frank Wilson, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

_Musicians._

  Thoph. L. Hacker.

  Calvin D. Rogers.

_Privates._

  Aldrich, Samuel K.

  Alger, Joseph, promoted corporal, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Alger, Westley, taken prisoner in the crater, July 30th, 1864.

  Allen, Thomas J., deserted in Baltimore, Md., May 1st, 1864.

  Allen, Lewis, promoted Serg't, July 1st, 1864.

  Anderson, Benjamin.

  Angel, Byron A.

  Arne, Courtland Z.

  Black, William Jas., died, July 12th, 1864, of wounds received in
  action, June 18th, 1864.

  Briggs, Thomas.

  Carney, John, taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864, in the crater.

  Carney, Nelson H.

  Carter, Michael.

  Collins, Cassious M.

  Cooledge, George W., discharged for disability, Feb. 12th, 1864.

  Cooley, Charles F.

  Chartier, Narcisse, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Davis, John, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Davis, David, taken prisoner in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Dodge, William H., transferred to company F, May 30th, 1864, for
  promotion.

  Gamble, David, transferred to company F, June 10th, 1864.

  Granger, Oliver.

  Greenhalgh, John E., killed June 18th, 1864, near Petersburg, Va.

  Goodbout, Charles, transferred from company F, May 30th, 1864.

  Hasson, William, transferred to accept promotion, May 20th, 1864.

  Hartman, John, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864; discharged for
  disability, June 1st, 1865.

  Hawes, Chancey, B., promoted corporal, July 1st, 1864, and
  sergeant, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Hutchinson, Albert M.

  Hurlburt, A. B. C., promoted corporal, March 1st, 1865.

  Hutchinson, Robert.

  Kelley, Thomas, deserted, March 18th, 1865.

  Kimberly, Benjamin A.

  Kenney, Thomas.

  Lane, Jesse, died of wounds, July 7th, 1864.

  Mills, Benjamin B.

  Mountfort, John, deserted, Dec. 9th, 1864.

  Morris, George P.

  Moore, William H., promoted corporal, Dec. 7th, 1864.

  Moses, Leonard H.

  McCarty, William, deserted at Madison, Wisconsin, April 22d, 1864.

  McGunell, Michael, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Odell, John A., discharged Oct. 15th, 1864.

  Olson, Anum, died in hospital, Sept. 19th, 1864.

  Paye, Martin.

  Peterson, Peter, taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864, in the crater.

  Peak, John, died of wounds, July 7th, 1864.

  Plunewell, Henry, discharged, March 25th, 1865.

  Ramsey, William.

  Rensimer, Joseph, in action, June 17th, 1864; promoted corporal,
  March 1st, 1865.

  Riner, John, died in hospital, Nov. 14th, 1864.

  Rood, Jas. B., promoted corporal, Dec. 7th, 1864.

  Rosencrans, Anson C.

  Sanders, Joel.

  Sanford, Munson B., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Scott, Walter, killed on picket, June 24th, 1864.

  Scott, Corwin D., wounded, June 18th, 1864; discharged.

  Slater, Charles G.

  Smith, Josiah B., wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Smith, Robert N., wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Smith, William B., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Springer, Samuel, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864; died of
  wounds, Sept. 4th, 1864.

  Solles, Edgar.

  Sterling, Wm., promoted corporal, Aug. 30th, 1864.

  Thatcher, Thomas J., taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864; exchanged,
  March 7th, 1865.

  Tritt, Zenas C., promoted corporal, Jan. 1st, and sergeant, March
  8th, 1865; wounded, July 30th, 1864.

  Van Deustan, Edward N., killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Waldo, Joseph.

  Warner, James L., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Whitney, Almond, killed in action, June 28th, 1864.


RECRUITS, COMPANY A.

_Volunteers._

  James Gillin, wounded in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Oramel E. Tupper.

  Luther Fuller.

  John McIntyre.

  Jas. M. Plott.

  Taylor Stevens.

  Wm. Fuller.

  Thos. Caley.

  George Cline.

  George Cox.

_Drafted Men._

  Gideon Ardoss.

  Leroy Beecher.

  Adam Clawson.

  Nich. Chambers.

  Peter Gavin.

  Reuben Gardner.

  Owen Hillman.

  B. H. W. Z. Kussow.

  S. P. O'Neil.

  Geo. W. Teal, promoted orderly sergeant, Dec. 22, 1864; and 1st
  Lieut., July 21st, 1865.

  P. Vanderlivoff.

  John Wart.

  Col. Wells.

_Substitutes._

  Charles White.

  H. R. Clark.

  F. N. Brasher.


MUSTER ROLL OF "B" COMPANY.

  Raised in Oshkosh and Janesville by R. C. EDEN and WM. H. EARL.
  Mustered into U. S. service at Madison, Wis., by Capt. T. T.
  BRAND, U. S. A., April 13, 1864.

_Captain._

  R. C. EDEN. Promoted Major, Dec. 15th, 1864. Lieut. Col., July
  21st, 1865. Brev. Lieut. Col. U. S. V.

_First Lieutenant._

  W. H. EARL. Died in Hospital, Washington, D. C., of wounds
  received in action, June 17th, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  N. S. DAVISON. Wounded, June 18th, 1864. Promoted First
  Lieutenant, July 28th, 1864. Wounded Dec. 15th, 1864. Promoted
  Captain, Dec. 15th, 1864. Discharged for disability, ---- 1865.

_Musicians._

  Wm. Burton, appointed principal musician, July, 1864.

  William Mason, transferred to Veteran Reserve Corps.

_Sergeants._

  L. D. Harmon, wounded June 17th; promoted 2d Lieut. July 23d,
  1864; 1st Lieut., Dec. 15th, 1864; Captain, May, 1865.

  J. E. Williamson, wounded Aug. 19th, 1864; promoted 2d Lieut.,
  Dec. 15th, 1864; 1st Lieut., May, 1865.

  T. D. Powers, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  O. E. Rice, died Aug. 14th, of wounds received in action, July
  30th, 1864.

  Thos. A. Lockhart, wounded June 17th, 1864.

_Corporals._

  J. P. Braynard, transferred to field hospital.

  E. S. Casler.

  W. A. Barber.

  E. Wheeler, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  M. Lockerby, June 17th, 1864; transferred to Vet. Res. Corps.

  Hy. G. Brown, died Aug. 3d of wounds received in action, June
  17th, 1864.

_Privates._

  Allbee, Perry, transferred to Vet. Res. Corps.

  Allen, W. S., promoted Sergeant.

  Allen, Norman.

  Babcock, Louis G.

  Barnes, Wm. E., died at Depot Hospital, City Point, Nov. 10th,
  1864.

  Barnes, Hollis J., died at White Hall Hospital, Bucks county,
  Pa., January 17th, 1865.

  Booth, Charles H., wounded June 17th, 1864.

  Boyd, Robert M.

  Boynton, Horace S., ambulance driver, 1st Div., 9th A. C. Train.

  Cross, Otis, missing in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Daikens, Amos.

  Daikens, Ezra.

  Denure, Jerome, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Devine, James B.

  Doty, Isaiah.

  Dunn, Charles.

  Duley, John W., died in the State of disease--date unknown.

  Dutcher, Horace.

  Eaton, Cyrus R., died in hospital, Alexandria, Va.; date unknown.

  Finley, Hugh, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  France, Aquila.

  Fuller, Napoleon, killed in trenches before Petersburg, July 6th,
  1864.

  Hall, John, killed in action June 17th, 1864.

  Hinckley, Edward.

  Holton, John C., died in post hospital, Madison, Wis., Apr. 27th,
  1864.

  Howard, Abram.

  Ingrahan, Eleazer S., wounded in action June 17th, 1864.

  Laib, William C.

  Lattin, Sylvester.

  Lawrenz, John, wounded in action July 30th; left leg amputated.

  Lee, Hugh, died in Armory Square Hospital, Washington, June 21st,
  1864.

  Luhm, Fred, died in Armory Square Hospital, Washington, Nov.
  18th, 1864.

  Mitchell, J. H.

  Miltimore, Nelson.

  McCurdy, Chandlier.

  McLaughlin, Thomas G., wounded in action June 17th, 1864;
  promoted corporal.

  Onderdonk, George E., promoted to corporal; wounded June 16th,
  1864.

  Parker, Francis D., wounded in action June 17th and discharged
  Dec. 15th, 1864.

  Parker, Francis, wounded in action June 18th; promoted Captain
  company H, 42d Wis., Sept. 23d, 1864.

  Peitzke, Wilhelm.

  Pitt, Horace C., wounded in action June 18th, 1864.

  Reilly, Michael, killed in action June 18th, 1864.

  Reilly, Michael O., killed in trenches before Petersburg, July
  26th, 1864.

  Rush, Thomas, deserted from Camp Randall, Apr. 28th, 1864.

  Scott, Stephen.

  Scoville, A. H., died in hospital, Washington, D. C., July 15th,
  '64.

  Scoville, Leonard D., killed in action June 18th, 1864.

  Shay, Michael, wounded June 17th, 1864.

  Shilston, Samuel, wounded in actions June 17th and Aug. 20th, '64.

  Shoemaker, Jonathan P., transferred to Vet. Res. Corps.

  Smith, Frederick, promoted corporal; wounded Aug. 19th, 1864.

  Stolkey, William.

  Stone, Samuel H., wounded July 17th, 1864; lost leg Dec. 28th,
  1864.

  Taff, George, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Thomas, John, deserted from Camp Randall, Apr. 20, 1864.

  Toms, George W., wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Toomey, Michael, wounded June 17th, 1864.

  Tuttle, Peter H., killed in action June 17th, 1864.

  Vanderwarker, Frank, discharged for disability.

  Wallace, David.

  Warren, James, wounded on picket, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Weigal, Jacob, wounded in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Winings, John Y.

  Willard, David B., wounded June 17th, 1864.

  Wojahn, Wilhelm, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Young, Aaron, killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Zahn, William, wounded June 17th, 1864; promoted corporal.

  Gleason, Michael, Jr., wounded June 17th, 1864; prom. corporal.

_Recruits._

(None.)

_Drafted Men._

  Joseph Amen.

  Fred. Bohren.

  P. J. Deuster.

  Jos. Hildebrand.

  M. Hewitt.

  P. Kissinger.

  Edw. Lilliecrap.

  M. Marquarts.

  L. D. Marshall, killed April 2d, 1865.

  S. Neville.

  August Otto.

  Orange Snell.

  Fred. Sattler.

  John Sieger.

  Jos. Smith.

  C. N. Clough.

  Martin Pfeifer.

  Jos. Schineat.

_Substitutes._

  Dav. Bartle.

  Jos. Ergel.

  Hy. Eckel.

  Wm. Roberts.

  Jas. Riley.

  Jacob Schneider.

  Wiley Whicher.

  Cyrus Tucker.


MUSTER ROLL OF "C" COMPANY.

  Raised in Mineral Point and neighborhood, by JOHN GREEN and A.
  J. PARKER. Mustered into U. S. service at Madison, Wisconsin, by
  Capt. T. T. BRAND, U. S. A., April 13th, 1864.

_Captain._

  JOHN GREEN. Promoted Major, Oct. 19th; Lieut. Col., Dec. 15th,
  1864; and Colonel, July 21st, 1865.

_First Lieutenant._

  A. J. PARKER. Discharged for physical disability, Nov. 30th, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  FREEMAN B. RIDDLE. Killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

_Sergeants._

  Philip Lawrence, promoted 2d Lieut., Dec. 13th, 1864; 1st Lieut.,
  Jan. 9th, 1865; resigned, June 3d, 1865.

  W. H. Green, died of wounds, July 9th, 1864.

  Francis Cooper, wounded, July 30th.

  Wm. Green, promoted 2d Lieut., Jan. 9th, 1865.

  Geo. F. Goldthorpe.

_Corporals._

  Thomas Parkin.

  Benson Hall, wounded, July, 30th, 1864; discharged May 19th, 1865.

  Sam'l Kenyon.

  Dexter B. Spears, wounded, June 17th, 1864.

  Oliver Martin.

  Reuben D. Shaw.

  Charles E. Clark, wounded, June 17th, 1864; died July 7th, 1864.

  Thos. W. Argue, died in hospital.

_Musicians._

  Josiah Baker.

  John L. Harrison.

_Privates._

  Ace, Elijah S.

  Argue, John J.

  Averill, William.

  Benton, John, discharged for disability.

  Ball, Julian, deserted, April 26th, 1864.

  Baker, Bryant, killed, June 18th, 1864.

  Barret, David.

  Bryant, David Z.

  Clark, Albert B.

  Colegrove, Webster, died in hospital, June 17th, 1864.

  Cotton, Chas. W.

  Crocker, Andrew E., died of wounds received in action, July 10th,
  1864.

  Cunningham, Henry H., wounded, July 30th.

  Cutshall, Taylor.

  Day, Albert L.

  Domey, Henry, killed, April 2d, 1865.

  Estee, John, killed, April 2d, 1865.

  Evens, Bow Devine.

  Fuller, Joshua P., killed, July 30th, 1864.

  French, Edward E., discharged for disability, Oct. 19th, 1864.

  Fruit, Enoch.

  Green, Henry P.

  Gunderson, Thomas.

  Hoare, Jas. A.

  Hall, Hosea.

  Hogness, Matthias G., died in hospital, Sept. 14th, 1864.

  Hollister, W.

  Kilmer, Abram.

  Kile, Jas.

  Kile, Geo. M.

  Lemche, Adolphe, wounded, June 17th, 1864.

  Levings, Noah.

  Martin, John.

  O'Bryan, John.

  Page, Lewis, wounded, June 17th, 1864; discharged, Feb. 20th,
  1865.

  Paulsen, Kittle, wounded, June 17th, 1864; discharged, Dec. 15th,
  1864.

  Plummer, Abram.

  Pergoy, Nathaniel, died of wounds received in action, July 30th,
  1864.

  Quimby, Wm., discharged, Aug. 15th, 1864.

  Rasey, Francis H., died of wounds received in action, June 17th,
  1864.

  Reesman, Phillip.

  Ross, Otis, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Soper, A., wounded, June 17th, 1864.

  Scott, A., died, May 29th, 1864.

  Sherwood, D. A., promoted corporal, and 1st sergeant.

  Seeley, Stewart.

  Smith, Wilber S.

  Smith, Benj. F.

  Scherer, Nicholas.

  Sharer, A., wounded, June 17th, 1864.

  Shrider, H.

  Spaulding, L.

  Spears, Jas.

  Spears, Wm. R., discharged, Aug. 25th, 1864.

  Teasdale, John.

  Terguson, Ole, wounded, July 18th, 1864.

  Walker, Peter, died from wounds received in action, June 18th,
  1864.

  Warren, Frank.

  Whitford, John F.

  Wheelock, Eugene, killed in action, July 20th, 1864.

  Williams, Thos. R., died in hospital, July 13th, 1864.

  Wilkinson, Edw.

  Woods, Benjamin, prisoner of war, exchanged, Sept., 1864.

  Wood, Chas., died in hospital of wounds received in action, July
  19th, 1864.

  Webster, Francis A., died in hospital, July 19th, 1864.

  Fitch, Victor.

_Recruits._

  Schuck, George.

  Gaylord, Benj., discharged, June 3d, 1865.

  Evins, Abram.

  Gardner, Eugene.

_Drafted Men._

  Bendickson, Knaudt.

  Engbertson, Gilbert.

  Gunderson, John.

  Johnson, Aroe, discharged, Jan. 20th, 1865.

  Ormson, Torge.

  Oleson, Isaac, discharged, June 3d, 1865.

  Oleson, Knaudt.

  Cram, Vasco, discharged, June 3d, 1865.

  Haas, Matthias.

  Kobernos, Fred., discharged, June 3d, 1865.

  Krooger, Christian.

  Lagerman, Josh, discharged, June 3d, 1865.

  Marquite, Frederick.

  Kriel, Paulus.

  Stolbe, Frederick.

_Substitutes._

  Cloos, John.

  Dettenthaler, Fred.

  Milling, Paul.


MUSTER ROLL OF "D" COMPANY.

  Raised in Waushara and Dane counties by ALVAH NASH and FRANK
  MUNGER, and mustered into U. S. service at Madison, Wis.

_Captain._

  ALVAH NASH. Promoted Major, July 21st, 1865.

_First Lieutenant._

  FRANK J. MUNGER. Prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864. Promoted
  Captain, July 21st, 1865.

_Second Lieutenant._

  W. C. POPE. Died of disease, April 30th, 1864.

_Sergeants._

  Geo. Hurst, promoted 2d Lieut., July 7th, 1864; transferred to
  company A.

  Geo. W. Gustin, died June 3d, 1865.

  Jas. Bennett, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Caleb Greenfield, wounded June 18th, 1864; discharged March, 1865.

  Thompson P. Crowe, wounded Sept. 30th, 1864.

_Corporals._

  Dan. C. Eager, died of wounds received in action June 17th, 1864.

  John W. Jobe.

  Joel Dewel, killed July 27th, 1864.

  Davis R. Lane, wounded July 30th, 1864; prisoner of war, April
  2d, 1865.

  Geo. B. Shumway, killed in action June 17th, 1864.

  Warren J. Vantassell.

  Chas. H. Pynchon.

  Zachariah Westbrooke, taken prisoner July 30th and died at
  Danville, Va.

_Musicians._

  Fred. Hurst.

  Benj. Wiggins.

_Privates._

  Ames, Nathaniel W.

  Abbott, Sheridan J., discharged Oct. 19th, 1864.

  Angier, Oscar F.

  Brunton, John, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Bryant, J. M., wounded June 28th, 1864; transferred to V. R. C.

  Bromaghim, Geo. W.

  Bromaghim, Frank W.

  Bent, Wm., wounded Oct. 27th, 1864; discharged June 10th, '65.

  Briggs, Wm. H., wounded April 2d, 1865; discharged June 6th, 1865.

  Blakesly, Tobias L.

  Benjamin, Herbert, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Beatty, Wm., wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Casey, Amos.

  Chase, Jonathan.

  Cox, Frederick.

  Crawford, Robt. M., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Cunningham, Chas. F., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Dallas, John P., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Douglas, David C., prisoner of war, April 2d, 1865.

  Eagan, Michael, died while home on furlough, Sept. 26th, 1864.

  Eagan, John.

  Eager, Thomas, killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Ferdon, Martin O.

  Fryman, Jas. D., wounded June 20th, 1864; transf. to V. R. C.

  Gillett, Elihu R., died in hospital May 10th, 1864.

  Gifford, Jas. M.

  Greenfield, John W., transf. to V. R. C.

  Harmon, Albion, died in hospital July 5th, 1864.

  Hawes, Ed. M.

  Hayward, Franklin, died in hospital Oct. 5th, 1864.

  Herrick, S. J.

  Hills, Eber H., died in hospital May 7th, 1864.

  Holmer, Benj.

  House, Elijah, transferred to 38th Wis. Vol. Infantry.

  Howe, Ambrose, wounded June 28th, 1864.

  Hurst, Charles, died in hospital Sept. 29th, 1864.

  Jameson, James W.

  Jameson, Francis, discharged July, 1864.

  Jarvis, Willard, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Johnson, John, transferred to 38th Wis. Vol. Infantry.

  Joslin, John W., promoted 2d Lieut. Dec. 29th, 1864; resigned
  June 10th, 1865.

  King, James, died in hospital May 14th, 1864.

  Lamb, Waldo W.

  Mills, Noah, died in hospital Aug. 5th, 1864.

  Newhall, Harrison C.

  Prutzman, David, promoted to 2d Lieut. and killed June 28th, '64.

  Putnam, Lyman, wounded June 17th, 1864; died in hospital Aug.
  12th, 1864.

  Putnam, Jacob, wounded July 30th, 1864, and April 2d, 1865.

  Prentice, Nathan B., Q. M. Sergeant; promoted Regimental Q. M.,
  May, 1865.

  Ramsbottom, Jas. E.

  Readman, Hiram W., transferred to 38th Wis. Vol. Infantry.

  Robinson, Ezra B., wounded July 30th, 1864; disc. Sept. 10th, '64.

  Schofield, Jacob A.

  Seely, Wm.

  Short, Patrick.

  Shower, John A.

  Signor, Jonah.

  Smith, Wm., transferred to Vet. Res. Corps.

  Specht, Fred., died in prison at Danville, Va., Nov. 3d, 1864.

  Stewart, Elisha J., discharged March 24th, 1865.

  Stilwell, Clark L., wounded June 17th, 1864.

  Taplin, John F.

  Wager, Marcus, died of wounds received in action June 17th, '64.

  Wagner, Michael.

  Waite, William, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Winslow, Elijah.

  Young, John, discharged Jan. 10th, 1865.

_Recruits_--(volunteers.)

  Nash, Locey A.

  Jones, Sandford G.

  Pease, John A.

  McMullen, John.

  Ditzen, Jacob, discharged June 6th, 1865.

  Horats, John, killed in action April 2d, 1865.

  Brown, Wm.

  Moorhouse, Robert.

  Taylor, Andrew M.

  Woodward, John B.

  Firman, Jacob B.

  Hills, Wm. H., wounded in camp, March 27th, 1864.

_Drafted._

  Wm. Covell.

  Richard E. Davis.

  Michael Hoose, wounded in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Worden A. Wood.

  Wm. Hartwig.

  Jacob Myers.

  Christian Emory.

  Adolph Campman.

  Charles Nack.

  Wm. Kaunie.

  Wm. Shrader.

  Anton Maas.

  Thomas Seholtec.

  Charles Block.

  Lucus Bartler.

  Fred. Harnees.

  William Rhineea.

_Substitute._

  Kelsin Holman, prisoner of war, April 2d, 1865.


MUSTER ROLL OF "E" COMPANY.

  Raised in La Crosse and Fond du Lac, by FRANK A. COLE and LEWIS
  U. BEALL, and mustered into U. S. service, at Madison, Wisconsin,
  April 18th, 1864.

_Captain._

  FRANK A. COLE. Died of wounds received in action, July 30th, 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  LEWIS U. BEALL. Wounded in action, July 30th, 1864; promoted
  Captain, Nov. 11th, 1864; honorably discharged, June 10th, 1865.

_Second Lieutenant._

  MELVILLE A. BARRY. Resigned, Aug. 24th, 1864.

_Sergeant._

  Archibald Douglas, died of wounds received in action, July 30th,
  1864.

  Jared Hunstinger, wounded, June 21st, 1864.

  Thomas Bishop, died of wounds received in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Dan'l Waltz, died in hospital, Jan. 3d, 1865.

  D. W. Osbourn, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

_Corporals._

  Wm. Fletcher, died in hospital.

  E. Laflin, wounded, June 18th, 1864.

  S. Thompson, wounded in action, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  A. Terry.

  Joseph Kennedy, killed in camp by the fall of a tree, March 16th,
  1865.

  George Davis, died in hospital, Sept. 21st, 1864.

  J. W. Shadbolt.

  Wm. Meinzer, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

_Musicians._

  Samuel A. Halleck.

  T. Brandon.

_Privates._

  Adam, Abraham.

  Baier, Joseph A.

  Baldwin, Wm. H., wounded, Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Batus, Adam, taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864.

  Bowell, Isaac, died in prison, date unknown.

  Boyer, Moses, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Bresel, Nirum.

  Brightman, Wendell D., killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Briggs, Robt. L., died in hospital at Danville, Va., prisoner,
  July 30th, 1864.

  Brown, Adolphus.

  Buck, Cassius M.

  Buck, Wm. W., promoted 2d Lieut., Jan. 8th, 1865, Captain, June,
  1865.

  Carter, Henry E., discharged, May 30th, 1865.

  Combs, Jas. W., died in hospital, Aug. 14th, 1864.

  Comstock, Marinus, died in hospital at Madison.

  Davenport, Nelson, wounded, June 18th, 1864.

  Delong, Wm., discharged, Oct. 20th, 1864.

  Earl, Thomas, promoted sergeant, Oct. 1st, 1864; wounded, June
  18th, 1864; promoted Lieutenant, July 21st, 1865.

  Fawver, Aaron.

  Fuller, Jas. L.

  Fuller, Levi, wounded, June 18th, 1864; transferred to V. R. C.,
  Jan. 17th, 1865.

  Gillett, Cyrus B., died in Madison, Wis.

  Green, Wm., missing in action, June 18th, 1864; supposed killed.

  Gunter, Wm., died in hospital, April 16th, 1865.

  Hawes, Lewis M., promoted to chaplain, Aug. 8th, 1864; resigned,
  March, 1865.

  Hall, George, prisoner of war, Dec. 10th, 1864.

  Hickman, Albert C., reported killed; missing since July 30th,
  1864.

  Hopkins, Edmund R.

  Huntsinger, Chester, wounded, June 25th, 1864.

  Ingalls, Lester H., missing, July 30th, 1864; supposed dead.

  Inman, Hiram C.

  Johnson, Henry.

  Kimball, Wm., deserted, April, 1864.

  Larkins, Jas., died of wounds received in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Losselyoung, John, missing in action, July 30th, 1864; dead.

  Losey, Isaac.

  Marshall, John I., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Moran, Alf. P., discharged, Jan. 12th, 1865.

  Murphy, Michael, discharged, Sept. 26th, 1864.

  McCraney, John T.

  McKeavey, John.

  McLaughlin, James.

  Newcomb, Jeremiah.

  Nichols, Edgar, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Osier, Joseph, wounded, June 18th, died, July 16th, 1864.

  Paulley, Jacob.

  Partridge, Edw. B., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Peter, August, wounded in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Raymond, Geo.

  Ritchie, Wesley, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864; transferred
  to V. R. C.

  Shadbolt, R.

  Shadbolt, John W.

  Smith, Willard.

  Sprague, Beriah D., died in hospital, Oct. 20th, 1864.

  Sweeney, Wm. A.

  Stoops, John.

  Terry, Albert O.

  Thomas, John, wounded in action, July 17th, 1864.

  Thompson, Wm. H.

  Thompson, John, killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Thompson, Charles B., killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Toothman, Wm., deserted at Madison.

  Turner, Abraham.

  Waltz, Dan'l, died in hospital, Jan. 3d, 1865.

  Watson, Joseph L., transferred to V. R. C.

  Watson, Ebenezer, taken prisoner, Dec. 10th, 1864; discharged,
  May 24th, 1865.

  Webster, Bradley.

  Wheeler, Ira B., promoted corporal, January, 1865.

  Wilkson, Chas.

  White, Charles, wounded, June 20th, 1864.

  Walker, Alexander.

_Recruits_--1864.

  Edward, Phillip.

  Campbell, Albert L., discharged, June 6th, 1865.

  Seward, Joel, discharged, June 6th, 1865.

  Whipple, Wm. H., discharged, June 6th, 1865.

  Van Alstine, Wm., discharged, June 6th, 1865.

_Recruits_--1865.

  Green, Stephen.

  Cox, Edward.

  Milheron, Peter.

  Lynch, Patsy.

  Boyce, James.

  Perry, Hopkins.

  Zander, Lucian V.

  Zander, James L.

_Substitutes._

  Reinschneider, Albert.

  Gleason, Burrell.

  Dudley, Julius.

  Berry, Henry W.

_Drafted._

  Eighme, Elmer.

  Edwards, Henry S.

  Merchant, Alexander.

  Rosbrook, Jonathan.

  Shovey, Peter C.

  Bowvee, Henry.

  Ecke, Harman.

  Ecke, Fred, died in hospital, May, 22d, 1865.

  Goltner, Ernste.

  Glynn, Timothy.

  Maynard, Allen, discharged, June 6th, 1865.

  Miller, William.

  Stille, Anton.

  Schele, Adolph.


MUSTER ROLL OF "F" COMPANY.

  Raised in Pierce and Dane counties by E. BURNETT and JAS. C.
  SPENCER, and mustered into U. S. service at Madison, Wis., April
  19th, 1864.

_Captain._

  ELLSWORTH BURNETT. Promoted Brevet Major, July, 21st, 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  JAS. C. SPENCER. Promoted Captain company G, January, 1865,
  Resigned June, 1865.

_Second Lieutenant._

  H. W. BELDEN. Promoted 1st Lieut. company A, November 10th, 1864,
  and Captain company C, Dec. 29th, 1864.

_Sergeants._

  W. M. Howes, killed in action, April 2d, 1865.

  John Butcher, died of wounds received in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Geo. W. Chinnoc, transferred to V. R. C.

  Morris W. Bliss, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Wm. Hasson, promoted sergeant, November 1st, 1864, 2d Lieut.,
  January 8th, 1865.

_Corporals._

  John H. Gouldsburry, discharged November, 1864.

  Jas. Little, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Wm. H. Hill, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Jos. A. Rollins.

  W. T. Bradshaw.

  Charles Randall, died May 24th, 1865.

  John W. Hilleburt, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

_Musicians._

  Brandon, Taylor.

  Slightam, William E.

_Privates._

  Adams, Lorenzo.

  Appleman, Valentine E.

  Atchison, John, transferred to Navy.

  Bagley, Trueman, died insane, February 18th, 1865.

  Barsanter, Frank.

  Brown, Charles D.

  Burdick, Oscar, killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Carr, Thomas, Jr.

  Caas, George, died of wounds received in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Carleton, Hollis D., wounded June 17th, 1864, and July 30th, 1864.

  Cline, George J., promoted corporal January 1st, 1865; killed in
  action, April 2d, 1865.

  Cragan, John, wounded June 18th, 1864; disch. May 3d, 1865.

  Coddington, John W., wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Conant, Wallace, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Douglas, Archibald, transferred to company E.

  Davis, James L.

  Douglas, John T., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Dunn, Payson.

  Flick, Marion, wounded in action, Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Forsythe, Charles R., killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Fuller, William E.

  Gordon, Gardner L., died in hospital, Sept. 7th, 1864.

  Graham, Sam., wounded July 30th, 1864; died in prison.

  Gray, Alonzo.

  Gamble, David.

  Hampton, John C., wounded in action, July 30th; discharged June
  27th, 1865.

  Hayter, William P.

  Hazen, Jonathan S.

  Hill, Denison K., wounded June 18th, 1864; discharged May 27th,
  1865.

  Hizer, Adolph, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Hoey, Dennison, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864; died in prison.

  Hodgson, Albert.

  Hodgson, G. W., discharged October 17th, 1864.

  Houston, George, killed on picket, June 26th, 1864.

  Hughhart, James S., discharged May 3d, 1865.

  Jones, Evans W., killed June 26th, 1864.

  Love, Jeremiah.

  Mace, Jonathan.

  Maud, William.

  McMahan, Peter, wounded July 30th, 1864, and April 2d, 1865.

  Morgan, Thomas, wounded June 18th, 1864; disch. Jan. 6th, 1865.

  McFail, Neil, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Oleson, Lars, prisoner of war July 30th, 1864; died in prison.

  Osgood, Charles J., wounded June 17th, 1864; discharged Dec. 2d,
  1864.

  Perkins, Benjamin, dismissed by sentence of G. C. M.

  Patterson, William.

  Patterson, Robert, discharged May 3d, 1865.

  Peterson, Ole, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Powell, William, killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Pieiei, George.

  Pulk, David M.

  Rautz, Peter, wounded in action, July 30th, 1884; discharged May
  26th, 1865.

  Selleck, Isaac, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Smith, George, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Stanley, James G.

  Stokes, Elias.

  Van Hosen, Norris, killed on picket, July 22d, 1864.

  Velzy, Charles, wounded in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Walden, Elisha H., killed July, 30th, 1864.

  Waldroff, Marion.

  Ward, Lemuel J., discharged May 4th, 1865.

  Weston, Horatio, promoted corporal, January 1st, and sergeant,
  April 10th, 1865.

  Winchester, Judson, promoted sergeant Jan. 1st, 1865, and 2d
  Lieut., July, 1865.

  Wise, Pembroke V., promoted Sergeant Major, June 22d, 1864, and
  Captain 31st U. S. C. T.

  Whitney, Louis M.

_Recruits_--1864.

  Francis Galbraith, discharged May 20th, 1865.

  Wm. H. Hogeboom, discharged May 20th, 1865.

  Jas. H. Hogeboom, discharged June 6th, 1865.

  David C. Martin, promoted sergeant, January 1st, 1865; discharged
  May 20th, 1865.

  Ed. W. Sargent, discharged May 24th, 1865.

1865.

  Hoefner, Geo., died of wounds received in action, April 2d, 1865.

  John Ingraham.

  Jacob Miller.

  Edwin Slaght.

  George Ottman.

  Charles Hopkins.

  Cortez B. Taylor.

  Samuel Barker.

_Substitutes._

  Rufus H. Holt.

  John McFall.

  C. J. Midgely.

  N. E. McLaughlin.

  Patrick Lee.

_Drafted._

  Thomas Chambers, died in hospital, June 14th, 1865.

  John Lynn, died of wounds received in action, April 2d, 1865.

  John Shirden.

  Norman Shaver, wounded in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Fred. Conrad.

  John Deits.

  Gottlieb Fisher.

  E. V. Graves.

  Christian Kolberg.

  Thomas Metlam.

  Henry Rhodes.

  Casper Schubert.

  Lafayette Saunders.

  Henry Sherman.

  Charles Silla.

  Edward Ward.

  A. J. Wood, died in hospital, February 9th, 1865.


MUSTER ROLL OF "G" COMPANY.

_Captain._

  MARTIN W. HELLER. Discharged for disability, Oct., 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  WM. P. ATWELL. Wounded, July 30th, 1864; discharged, Oct., 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  A. J. HOLMES. Taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864; promoted to 1st
  Lieut. Co. K, June, 1865.

_Sergeants._

  George Graham, commissioned 1st Lieut., December 29th, 1864.

  Stephen Skeel, appointed 1st Serg't Sept. 1st, 1864; commissioned
  2d Lieut., March 1st, 1865.

  Edward L. Doolittle, wounded and taken prisoner, July 30th, 1864;
  appointed 1st Serg't March 1st, 1865.

  Henry A. Chase, wounded July 30th, 1864; made Commissary
  Sergeant, Feb. 13th, 1865.

  William Thatcher.

_Corporal._

  William E. Hussey, wounded July 30th, 1864; killed, April 2d,
  1865.

  Lawrence T. Bristol, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Heman A. Babcock, 3d Corp., promoted 1st Serg't company D.

  John M. Cenru, killed July 30th, 1864.

  George H. Vaughan, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Ozias C. Dwyer, made Serg't Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Robert R. Minnick.

  Benjamin M. Collins, reduced to the ranks.

_Privates._

  James E. Andrews, promoted Corporal, August 1st, 1864; made
  Sergeant, March 1st, 1865.

  Thomas Applebee.

  William Arthurs.

  Robert A. Amor, died October 22d, 1864.

  George N. Bishop.

  Christian Bergeman, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Seneca Bentley, deserted June 14th, 1864.

  James H. Bellinger.

  Albert Bovee, Jr.

  Charles B. Babcock, promoted Corporal May 2d, 1865.

  Franklin Bigelow, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Orlando A. Burdick, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Samuel M. Badger.

  Francis A. Baldwin.

  Thomas Curtin, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Francis Cain.

  George Cole, deserted June, 1864.

  Hiram P. Cutting, prisoner of war since July 30th, 1864.

  Joseph E. Clark.

  George Daggett, died August 19th, 1864.

  Horatio N. Day.

  Elias Delong, discharged May 27th, 1865.

  Alfred Dewitt.

  Thomas S. Draper.

  John Farnsworth, died in prison at Danville, Va.

  Victor Fitch, transferred to company C.

  Egbert Gardner, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  Jens Holsteenson.

  Isaac Joiner, transferred to V. R. C.

  Thomas H. Lea, killed July 30th, 1864.

  John Loible, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  Nicholas H. Lang, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Orange M. Lincoln, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Edmund M. Long, killed July 24th, 1864, on picket.

  Miron E. Lawrence, promoted Corporal, May 1st, 1865.

  Joseph H. Meixell, transferred to V. R. C.

  John McIntyre, promoted Corporal, March 1st, 1865.

  Luther L. Masser.

  Charles Nickell, killed Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Charles J. Neff, killed July 30th, 1864.

  George W. Pitt, wounded on picket July 23d, 1864.

  Adolphus Page, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Minn Palmer, killed July 30th, 1864.

  William Paine, deserted December, 1864.

  Isaac J. Paine.

  John A. Plunkett, taken prisoner July 30th, 1864.

  David Pearson, deserted May, 1864.

  Mortimer W. Perry, killed April 2d, 1865.

  Clarence L. Powers, promoted Corporal, April 1st, 1865.

  Freeman L. Roberts.

  George Right, deserted May, 1864.

  Richard B. Rose.

  Charles Salisbury, wounded himself January 3d, 1865.

  Josiah Sweet, discharged May 27th, 1865.

  Justin L. Spencer.

  John Milton Smith, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  John Smith, deserted May, 1864.

  Francis Schofield, died June 14th, 1864.

  William Shilling, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  Henry R. Sprage, died at Danville, Va., in prison.

  Wilton L. Squires.

  Joseph H. Sexton, promoted Corporal, Feb. 12th, 1865.

  James Q. Severns, promoted Corporal, June 6th, 1864.

  James J. Taylor, promoted Sergeant, April 1st, 1865.

  Theodore T. Upright, killed July 30th, 1864.

  Meredith M. Whitt, transferred to company H.

  Hans. B. Warner, wounded July 30th, 1864, and taken prisoner.

  William Wells, died October 14th, 1864.

  Edward Youerell, wounded July 30th, 1864.

  George Banon.

_Volunteer Recruits._

  John A. Showns, transferred to company D.

  Robert Patchet.

  John Cummings.

  William Woolfitt, Jr.

  John Deniger.

  Cyrus Widger.

  Patrick Penneffy.

  Monmouth Baldwin.

  James Bond.

  John McGeen.

  Van Vechten Livingston.

_Drafted Recruits._

  Stephen Griffith, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  Charles P. Rood.

  Andrew Matlott.

  Nicholas Rottice.

  Daniel Kennedy.

  Miles Smith.

  Joseph Shermer.

  Michael Shultz.

  Olois Schafer.

  Peter Vroman.

  Christopher Winkauf, promoted Corporal, May 1st, 1865.

  John Dunck.

  Freerick Ellion.

  Robert Kencel.

  Frederick Ohen, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  Martin Van-de-Vel-de.

_Substitutes._

  Nels Bryngleson, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  William H. Rood.

  Joseph Dupoint, wounded April 2d, 1865.

  Marius Pero, killed December 22d, 1864.

  John H. Dalton.

  Edwin C. Rist.

  Thomas Feenan.

  Jacob Goodrow.


MUSTER ROLL OF "H" COMPANY.

PERMANENT PARTY.

_Captain._

  FRANK T. HOBBS. Wounded, June 18th, 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  THOS. CARMICHAEL. Discharged, Oct. 7th, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  JOS. H. BRIGHTMAN. Resigned, Aug. 7th, 1864.

_Sergeants._

  John Deidrich.

  Carl M. Peck, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Hy. Carman.

  D. L. Cole, killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Edw. Ehle, promoted.

_Corporals._

  Fred. Bassett, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  R. M. Stockwell.

  Jas. B. Wait.

  A. Plummer, discharged, July 3d, 1864.

  Chauncey Blunt.

  S. P. Kanable, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864; promoted,
  Serg't, May 1st, 1865.

  John M. Wells, promoted 1st Serg't, Jan. 1st, 1865; prisoner of
  war, April 2d, 1865.

  Chas. Schrœder, wounded, June 18th, 1864.

_Musician._

  Adelbert Eastman, discharged, March 25th, 1865.

_Privates._

  Althouse, Christian.

  Ackley, Adnah, promoted corporal, April 11th, 1865.

  Allabeck, Geo. W.

  Arnald, Edw'd.

  Behling, Geo. W. P.

  Baird, Jas. R.

  Bendrick, John, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Boyle, Patrick.

  Benscotter, Barney.

  Becker, Henry. D.

  Bassett, Frederick, promoted corporal, May 1st, 1864; prisoner,
  July, 30th.

  Blunt, Chauncey.

  Bandel, Joseph, promoted, 2d Lieut., Jan. 8th, 1865.

  Beden, Jonas W.

  Chisholm, Wm.

  Clinkamer, Peter, died of wounds, Aug. 3d, 1864.

  Crouse, Jonathan.

  Core, Geo. W., promoted corporal, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Crabtree, John, died of wounds, Nov. 8th, 1865.

  Dillen, Abraham, prisoner of war, April 2d, 1864.

  Endicott, Wm. A., killed in action, April 2d, 1865; promoted
  sergeant, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Ericson, Lewis M., promoted corporal, April 11th, 1865.

  Foss, Charles B.

  Gould, Charles H., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Gillett, Marcus D., died of wounds received in action, July 20th,
  1864.

  Gault, Henry A., killed in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Hughbanks, David, deserted, May 2d, 1864.

  Hoke, George.

  Heath, Orin.

  Highday, Geo. S.

  Halsted, Luther.

  Kendal, Zachariah, discharged, March 6th, 1865.

  Kanable, Simon, promoted sergeant, May 1st; prisoner of war,
  July, 30th, 1864.

  Hassilky, Wm., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Lamb, Wm. A.

  Long, Thomas, died of wounds, July 6th, 1864.

  Luchterhaud, Ernst, died of wounds, July 9th, 1864.

  Manlove, Oliver P., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Metcalf, Wm. G., discharged, March 25th, 1865.

  McCloud, Duley, killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Nash, Anderson.

  Norton, Edward L.

  Prince, Sandford C., discharged, July 5th, 1864.

  Parvis, Geo. W., promoted, April 11th, 1865.

  Provo, Thos., prisoner, July 30th, 1864.

  Parker, Rodolpho W., transferred to V. R. C.

  Quick, Riley.

  Rowe, Geo., promoted corporal, May 1st, 1865.

  Reece, Chas. H., discharged, July 3d, 1864.

  Soper, Foster R., died, Aug., 1864.

  Safford, Wm.

  Schrœder, Charles, died of wounds, July 6th, 1864.

  Schrœder, Charles, promoted corporal; wounded, June 18th, 1864.

  Statton, Wm., discharged, March 25th, 1865.

  Slonager, Fred., died of wounds, July 24th, 1864.

  Skinner, Wm.

  Skinner, Abner, B., promoted corporal, May 1st, 1865.

  Scheidigger, Andrew, promoted corporal, Jan. 1st, 1865.

  Scoville, Levi.

  Storey, John W.

  Trigel, Reichart, killed in action.

  Thorpe, Thomas E., transferred to V. R. C.

  Willoughby, John R., died of wounds received, Sept. 12th, 1864.

  Winfield, Henry.

  Wood, Aseill, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Wells, John M., 1st Serg't, Jan. 1st, 1865; prisoner of war,
  April 2d, 1865.

  Wagner, John.

  Dickey, Rob't.

  Dean, Lafayette, discharged, Nov. 18th, 1864.

  Flook, Abner H., transferred to V. R. C.

  Lee, John, deserted, May 2d, 1864.

  Paine, Wm. A.

  Deiderich, John.

  Peck, Carl M., killed in action, June 18th, 1864.

  Carman, Henry.

  Cole, David L., killed in action, June 17th, 1864.

  Ehle, Edw. A., promoted sergeant.

  Stockwell, Rob't M.

  Wait, Jas. B., promoted corporal, May 1st, 1864.

  Plumer, Amos, discharged, July 3d, 1864.

_Recruits._

  Appleman, Valentine E., discharged, Jan. 23d, 1865.

  Maud, Wm., discharged, Jan. 23d, 1865.

  Tax, Thos.

  Belknap, Seba.

  Tax, Geo.

  Pottgeisser, Phillip.

  Warwick, Dan'l.

  Sercom, Chas.

_Drafted._

  Schmitt, Wm.

  Schuster, Christian.

  Bosak, Wm., killed in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Kitzman, John F.

  Kruyer, Dan'l.

  Kreuke, Charles.

  Mallo, Fred., killed in action, April 2d, 1865.

  Burchardt, Chas.

  Luther, Paul.

  Dollert, Carol.

  Kowitz, Andrew.

  Joeres, Thomas, discharged, May 20th, 1865.

  Wollenberg, Fred.

  Schultz, Herman.

  Wintermantel, Jacob.

  Lumbay, Fred.

  Tarvour, John.

  Gasser, Geo.

  Gallis, John.

  Gelhaus, Arnold.

  Sehard, Necklaus, discharged, March 6th, 1865.


MUSTER ROLL OF "I" COMPANY.

Raised in various counties.

_Captain._

  GEORGE A. BECK.

_First Lieutenant._

  EDWARD HANSON. Resigned July 20th, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  JOSEPH O. CHILSON. Dismissed the service by G. C. M.

_Sergeants._

  John C. Avery, wounded June 18th, 1864; reduced to ranks Jan.
  1st, 1865.

  Matthias Bauer, discharged October 22d, 1864.

  Elias W. Reidy.

  John Regan, reduced to the ranks, November 1st, 1864.

  Edward Thurston.

_Corporals._

  Titsworth Barrett, reduced to ranks Nov. 1st, 1864.

  Henry Kulman, reduced to ranks Nov. 1st, 1864.

  John Stockhardt, killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Louis Dorman.

  Seth G. Ferdon, reduced to ranks Nov. 1st, 1864.

  E. R. Mayville.

  Charles Frank, promoted Sergeant January 1st, 1865.

  Joseph Blair.

_Musicians._

_Privates._

  Avery, John C., wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Applebee, Gilbert, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Ammerman, Albert.

  Allen, Lloyd W., deserted May 23d, 1865.

  Brodhagen, William.

  Bagg, James, deserted May 1st, 1865.

  Bruss, Gottlieb.

  Brown, Charles P., died in hospital Nov. 28th, 1864.

  Blair, Joseph.

  Bates, Aaron G., died of wounds received in action July 30th, '64.

  Callahan, Matthew, killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Cowdy, Lester L.

  Caldwell, William A., killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Cady, Benjamin A., discharged April 20th, 1865.

  Cook, Wm. H., died in hospital September 27th, 1864.

  Dipple, Conrad, discharged December 8th, 1864.

  Donaldson, Henry.

  Fidler, Christian.

  Frank, Charles.

  Ferdon, Seth.

  Fifield, Jacob, killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Ferris, Frank, discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Ferris, Newton, discharged June 1st, 1864.

  Fendleson, Jones, discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Graham, George, transferred to company G.

  Goodknow, Austin, died in hospital July 30th, 1864.

  Hatch, Lester M.

  Hamilton, George M., wounded in action June 17th, 1864;
  discharged March 18th, 1865.

  Harris, Caleb.

  Henry, James, deserted May 1st, 1865.

  Honey, Henry G.

  Johnson, Peter I., wounded in action September 30th, 1864.

  Kennedy, Henry, discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Kimball, Nathaniel, died of wounds received in action June 17th,
  1864.

  Klauch, Peter, deserted May 1st, 1864.

  Lenz, Ferdinand, discharged June 8th, 1865.

  Lease, John J., wounded Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Lease, Wm. A., killed in action June 18th, 1864.

  Lombard, Halbert, discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Mosey, George W., discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Moore, Abner M., deserted in battle August 19th, 1864.

  Maxin, Zenas, promoted Sergeant, Nov. 1st, 1864; discharged June
  20th, 1865.

  Mayville, Ephraim.

  Musback, Fred., wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Myers, Jacob H., died in hospital Oct. 8th, 1864.

  Marshal, Hy., mustered out June 27th, 1865.

  Pulk, Henry, died of wounds received in action June 18th, 1864.

  Parks, Henry S.

  Perkins, Wyatt.

  Picket, Samuel, promoted Corporal January 1st, 1865; Q. M.
  Sergeant May 1st, 1865.

  Qualman, John.

  Robertson, Solomon, promoted Corporal November 1st, 1864; reduced
  April 1st, 1865.

  Riley, Wesley, wounded July 30th; promoted 1st Sergeant January
  1st, 1865; 2d Lieutenant March 23d, 1865.

  Randall, Albert.

  Rappold, Henry, killed in action July 30th, 1864.

  Roseman, Henry G., discharged May 3d, 1865.

  Schous, Henry, died September 26th, 1864.

  Seebor, John W., discharged August 3d, 1864.

  Strong, Morell V. G., discharged February 12th, 1865.

  Stemper, Nicholas.

  Stringer, William.

  Staver, Henry.

  Winkler, Herman, wounded June 25th, 1864; discharged June 26th,
  1865.

  Weldon, Elias, discharged July 5th, 1864.

  Walt, John.

  Warner, Almon.

  Wilcox, Seth, died of wounds received in action Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Wolcott, David L.

  Dahrman, Louis.

  Kulman, Henry, wounded July 30th, 1864; disch. May 3d, 1865.

  Stockhart, John, died in prison at Danville, Va.

  Titsworth, Burrett, promoted Corporal; mustered out May 22d, '65.

  Bauer, Matthias.

  Reidy, Elias W.

  Regan, John, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Thurston, Edward.

  Dike, William, deserted May 14th, 1864.

  Kellner, Andrew, wounded July 2d, 1864.

  Rowley, Newell G., promoted Commissary Sergeant Aug. 1st, '64.

  Walker, Alexander.

_Recruits_, (1865.)

  George L. Cross, promoted Sergeant March 30th, 1865.

  John H. La Point.

  Henry B. Starkey.

  Edgar Lyon.

  Jacob Thon.

  Frank Sowa.

  Charles Lauer.

_Substitutes._

  Henry Winkler.

  William Ohlman.

  John Lick.

  August Herbet.

  Moritz Fidler.

  Ernst Wagner.

  John Wagner.

  Charles Louky.

  August Knocka.

  Rudolph Nauman.

  Frank Bernardu.

  Ernst Miller.

  Hermon Gable.

  Carl Nernberger.

  Jacob Schindler.

  Christoph Henrich.

  Anton Mickle, discharged May 3d, 1865.

_Drafted._

  Joseph Bronson.

  Amos Favel.

  George Mais.

  Bertholde Schwartze.

  Joseph Schneider.

  George Kopetzka.

  Albert Reinschneider.

  August Heineman.


MUSTER ROLL OF "K" COMPANY.

  Raised in Shawanaw, Dane, and other counties, by J. W. HITCHCOCK
  and THOS. CARMICHAEL. Mustered into U. S. service at Madison,
  Wis., May 5th, 1864.

_Captain._

  A. A. BURNETT. Died of wound received in action, July 30th, 1864.

_First Lieutenant._

  GEO. D. MCDILL. Wounded in action, July 30th; promoted Captain,
  Sept. 27th; resigned, Nov. 2d, 1864.

_Second Lieutenant._

  EDW. I. GRUMLEY. Promoted 1st Lieut., Oct. 19th; transferred to
  company "H."

_Sergeants._

  Meredith M. Whitt, wounded and prisoner, July 30th; escaped and
  promoted 1st Lieut., Dec. 29th, 1864; killed in action, April 2d,
  1865.

  Clark Thomas, promoted 2d Lieut., Dec. 29th, 1864.

  Isaac N. Salisbury, wounded, July 30th, 1864.

  Thos. Kershaw, wounded and prisoner, July 30th, 1864.

  John Gallaino, killed in action, Aug. 19th, 1864.

_Corporals._

  Benj. N. Smith.

  Wm. Coxhall, wounded in action, Aug. 19th; transferred to V. R. C.

  Semour Hah-pah-ton-won-i-quette, killed in action, July 30th,
  1864.

  Jervis Ames, wounded in action, Aug. 19th, 1864; discharged, June
  11th, 1865.

  Peter Little.

  Alex. McCurdy.

  Joseph Lane, wounded, July 27th, 1864.

  Meshell Kayso.

_Privates._

  Amundson, Halvor.

  Ah-she-toh-yash, James, wounded, Aug. 20th, 1864.

  Ah-pah-ke, Isaac, wounded, Aug. 20th, 1864.

  Bishop, Chester, killed in action, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Bean, Norris.

  Chatfield, David B.

  Cox, Charles, wounded in action, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Downie, Geo. H., discharged, June 10th, 1865.

  Evins, Edward.

  Hammond, Lewis P., prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864; died in
  hospital, March 21st, 1865.

  Hah-pah-to-ka-sic, Charles.

  Hart, Moses.

  Hammond, Abner, deserted, June 26th, 1864.

  Holbrook, Geo. F., deserted, July 13th, 1864.

  Hillier, Wm. H.

  Hopper, Martin S.

  Hamblin, Henry S., wounded in action, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Ingalls, Frank H., missing in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Ireton, Robert, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Kah-wah-tah-wah-pao, Hy, wounded, April 2d, 1865.

  Kenosha, Meshell, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Kah-to-tah, Jerome, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Ken-nein-we-kasic, Samuel.

  Kas-kah-tup-pa, William.

  King, Peter, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Little, Peter.

  Mitchell, Robert R., wounded in action, April 2d, 1865.

  McCormick, Patrick.

  Murray, Julius A., wounded in action, July 30th, 1865.

  May-che-won, Jos., deserted.

  Mach-me-no-mo-nee, Joseph.

  Mah-ma-ka-wit, Meshel, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Menosh, John, discharged, April 10th, 1865.

  Mosh-she-nosh, Barney, killed in action, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Mach-o-pah-tah, Solomon.

  McGowan, Patrick, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864; died, March
  20th, 1865.

  McCurdy, Alexander.

  McCurdy, Thomas, deserted.

  Non-noc-ke-keshin, Mitchell.

  Nah-pah-nah-cochen, deserted, July 12th, 1864.

  Nah-she-kah-appah, Amable, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Nah-wah-quah, Joseph, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Nelson, Gunder, wounded and prisoner, July 30th; died, March
  20th, 1865.

  Osh-wah-nometon, Meshell, deserted.

  Nugent, John, discharged, April 8th, 1865.

  Pah-po-not-nien, Peter, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864; died,
  March 20th, 1865.

  Pe-quach-ena-nien, Jac., wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Pah-po-quah, John B., missing in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Pah-po-quin, Joseph, killed in action, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  Piah-wah-sha, August, prisoner of war July 30th, 1864; died,
  March 20th, 1865.

  Pah-ye-wah-sit, Joseph, wounded in action, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Rubber, Benjamin, died of wounds received in action, July 30th,
  1864.

  Swenson, John A.

  Smith, Noyce B.

  Shawano, Lewis.

  Sha-boi-sha-ka, Meshell, wounded in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Sha-wah-ne-penas, John.

  Shah-boi-sha-kah, Meshell, prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  She-she-quin, Edward, wounded, Feb. 27th, 1865, in camp.

  She-pah-kasic, John B., wounded in action, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  Spinney, Wm., wounded, July 30th, 1864; promoted sergeant, Nov.
  1st, 1864; 1st Serg't, July, 1865.

  Stevens, Chas. E., wounded, July 30th, 1864; discharged, Sept.
  12th, 1864.

  Salisbury, Isaac N., wounded, July 30th, 1864; discharged Sept.
  12th, 1864.

  Smith, Benj.

  Teco, Dominique, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Townsend, Alfred.

  Wah-ton-nut, Felix, killed in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Wah-bun-o, Antoine, wounded, Aug. 20th, 1864.

  Weier-is-kasit, Paul, missing in action, July 30th, 1864.

  Waukau, John.

  Wah-sah-we-quon, Joseph, prisoner, July 30th, 1864; died, April
  7th, 1865.

  Wah-sha-kah-ka-nick, Robert.

_Recruits._

  Geo. Andree, wounded in action, April 2d, 1864.

  Wm. Claus.

  Fred. Grimshaw, discharged, June 6th, 1865.

  Geo. Kingsbury.

  Ralph Lees.

  Edw. A. Russell.

  Andrew Elliott.

_Substitutes._

  Andrew Anderson.

  Henry Dane.

  Martin Drott.

  Daniel Large.

  Sam'l W. Ringwood.

  Joseph Storr.

  Chas. C. Troxell.

  Thasten Thastenson.

  Alfred Hubbard.

  Eugene Auchmoody.

_Drafted Men._

  Ole Christopherson, discharged, June 7th, 1865.

  Ole Christopherson, jr., discharged, June 7th, 1865.

  Philander H. Cady.

  Halbert Harvey.

  John Knudson, discharged, June 7th, 1865.

  Laban La Rue.

  Henry Olson, discharged, June 7th, 1865.

  Peter Schwindling.




OUR DEAD.


"A" COMPANY.

  Capt. Samuel Stevens, June 18th, 1864.

  1st Lieut. Sanford Jones, August 29th, 1864.

  Sergt. Oliver H. Hunt, December 16th, 1864.

  Corp. Tim. E. Wade, November 7th, 1864.

  Corp. Benjamin F. Wheeler, June 18th, 1864.

_Privates._

  Wm. Jas. Black, July 12th, 1864, from wounds received in action,
  June 18th, 1864.

  John E. Greenhalgh, June 18th, 1864.

  Jesse Lane, July 7th, 1864.

  Annum Oleson, September 19th, 1864.

  John Peak, July 7th, 1864.

  John Riner, November 14th, 1864.

  Munson B. Sanford, June 18th, 1864.

  Walter Scott, June 24th, 1864, killed on picket.

  William B. Smith, June 18th, 1864.

  Sam. Springer, September 4th, 1864, effect of wounds received in
  action, June 18th, 1864.

  Edward N. Van Deustan, July 30th, 1864.

  James L. Warner, June 18th, 1864.

  Almond Whitney, June 18th, 1864.


"B" COMPANY.

  1st Lieut. Wm. H. Earl, July 4th, 1864, of wounds received in
  action, June 17th.

  Sergt. O. E. Rice, August 14th, 1864, of wounds received in
  action, July 30th.

  Corp. H. G. Brown, August 3d, 1864, of wounds received in action,
  June 17th.

_Privates._

  William E. Barnes, November 10th, 1864.

  Hollis J. Barnes, January 17th, 1865.

  Otis Cross, July 30th, 1864, missing, supposed killed.

  John W. Duley, date unknown.

  Cyrus R. Eaton, date unknown.

  Hugh Finley, June 18th, 1864.

  Napoleon Fuller, July 6th, 1864.

  John Hall, June 17th, 1864.

  John C. Holton, April 27th, 1864.

  Hugh Lee, June 24th, 1864.

  Fred. Luhm, November 18th, 1864.

  Michael Reilly, June 18th, 1864.

  Michael O'Reilly, July 26th, 1864.

  A. Scoville, July 15th, 1864.

  L. D. Scoville, June 18th, 1864.

  Peter H. Tullis, June 17th, 1864.

  William Wojahn, June 18th, 1864.

  A. Young, June 19th, 1864, of wounds received in action, June
  17th.


"C" COMPANY.

  2d Lieut. F. B. Riddle, June 19th, 1864, of wounds received June
  18th.

  Sergt. W. H. Green, July 19th, 1864, wounds received June 18th.

  Corp. E. Wheelock, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. Chas. E. Clark, July 17th, 1864, wounded in action.

  Corp. John W. Estee, April 2d, 1865.

_Privates._

  W. Colegrove, June 17th, 1864.

  A. E. Crocker, July 10th, 1864, killed on picket.

  J. P. Fuller, July 30th, 1864.

  M. G. Hogness, September 14th, 1864.

  N. Peregoy, July 30th, 1864.

  F. H. Rasey, June 18th, 1864.

  Otis Ross, June 18th, 1864.

  A. Scott, May 29th, 1864.

  P. Walker, August 22d, 1864.

  Thomas R. Williams, July 13th, 1864.

  Charles Wood, July 19th, 1864.

  F. A. Webster, July 19th, 1864.

  T. W. Argue, July 19th, 1864.

  Henry Domey, April 2d, 1865.


"D" COMPANY.

  2d Lieut. Webster C. Pope, April 30th, 1864.

  2d Lieut. David Prutzman, June 29th, 1864.

  Sergt. George W. Gustin, January 4th, 1865.

  Corp. George B. Shumway, June 17th, 1864.

  Corp. Joel Denel, July 28th, 1864.

  Corp. Daniel C. Eager, July 14th, 1864.

  Corp. Franklin Haywood, February 5th, 1864.

  Corp. Zachariah Westbroke, November 7th, 1864.

_Privates._

  James King, May 14th, 1864.

  Thomas Eager, July 30th, 1864.

  Albion Harmon, July 5th, 1864.

  Noah Mills, August 5th, 1864.

  Lyman Putnam, August 12th, 1864.

  Elihu Gillett, August 10th, 1864.

  Eber H. Hills, May 7th, 1864.

  Marcus Wager, July 8th, 1864.

  Charles Hurst, September 29th, 1864.

  Michael Eagan, September 26th, 1864.

  Fred. Speck, November 3d, 1864.

  John Horats, April 2d, 1865.


"E" COMPANY.

  Capt. Frank A. Cole, July 30th, 1864.

  1st Sergt. Archibald Douglas, July 30th, 1864.

  Sergt. Thomas Bishop, June 17th, 1864.

  Sergt. Daniel Waltz, January 3d, 1865.

  Corp. William Fletcher.

  Corp. Joseph Kennedy, March 16th, 1864, killed by fall of a tree.

  Corp. George Davis, September 21st, 1864.

  Corp. William Meinzer, July 30th, 1864.

_Privates._

  T. Bowell, died in rebel prison, date unknown.

  Moses Boyer, June 18th, 1864.

  W. D. Brightman, July 30th, 1864.

  R. L. Briggs, Danville, Va., prisoner of war.

  James W. Combs, August 14th, 1864.

  Marinus Comstock.

  C. C. Gillett.

  W. Green, June 18th, 1864.

  William Gunter, April 16th, 1865.

  A. C. Hickman, July 30th, 1864, missing in action.

  L. H. Ingalls, July 30th, 1864, missing in action.

  James Larkins, July 30th, 1864.

  J. I. Marshall, June 18th, 1864.

  Joseph Osier, July 16th, 1864, wounded June 18th, 1864.

  Beriah Sprague, October 20th, 1864.

  John Thompson, June 17th, 1864.

  Charles B. Thompson, June 17th, 1864.

  Daniel Waltz, January 3d, 1865.

  Fred. Eche, May 22d, 1865.


COMPANY "F."

  1st Serg't W. M. Howes, April 2d, 1865.

  Serg't John Butcher, June 18th, 1864.

  Serg't Morris W. Bliss, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. Jas. Little, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. Wm. H. Hill, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. Chas. Randall, May 24th, 1864.

  Corp. J. W. Hilleburt, June 18th, 1864.

_Privates._

  Truman Bagley, Feb. 18th, 1865.

  Oscar Burdick, June 17th, 1864.

  Geo. Caas, July 30th, 1864.

  Hollis D. Carlton, July 30th, 1864.

  Geo. J. Cline, April 2d, 1865.

  Wallace Conant, June 18th, 1864.

  Chas. R. Forsythe, June 17, 1864.

  Gardner L. Gordon, Sept. 7th, 1864.

  Sam. Graham, died in rebel prison.

  Dennison Hoey, died in rebel prison.

  E. W. Jones, June 26th, 1864.

  Lars Oleson, died in rebel prison.

  Wm. Powell, June 17th, 1864.

  Isaac Selleck, July 30th, 1864.

  N. Van Hosen, July 22d, killed on picket.

  Elisha H. Walden, July 30th, 1864.

  Geo. Houston, June 26th, 1864.

  Geo. Hoefner, April 2d, 1864.

  Thos. Chambers, June 14th, 1865.

  John Lynn, April 2d, 1865.

  A. J. Wood, Feb. 9th, 1865.


COMPANY "G."

  Corp. Wm. E. Hussey, April 2d, 1865.

  Corp. Lawrence J. Bristol, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. John. M. Converse, July 30th, 1864.

  Corp. Geo. H. Vaughan, July 30th, 1864.

_Privates._

  R. A. Amor, Oct. 22d, 1864.

  Christian Bergeman, July 30th, 1864.

  Frank Bigelow, July 30th, 1864.

  Thomas Curtin, July 30th, 1864.

  Geo. Daggett, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  John Farnsworth, died in prison at Danville, Va.

  Thos. H. Lea, July 30th, 1864.

  Nicholas H. Lang, July 30th, 1864.

  Orange M. Lincoln, July 30th, 1864.

  Edmund M. Long, July 24th, 1864; killed on picket.

  Charles Nickels, Sept. 30th, 1864.

  Chas. I. Neff, July 30th, 1864.

  Adolphus Page, July 30th, 1864.

  M. Palmer, July 30th, 1864.

  M. W. Perry, April 2d, 1865.

  F. Schofield, June 14th, 1864.

  H. R. Sprague, died in prison at Danville, Va.

  Theo. T. Upright, July 30th, 1864.

  W. Well, Oct. 14th, 1864.

  M. Pero, Dec. 22d, 1864.


COMPANY "H."

_Privates._

  John Bendrick, June 18th, 1864.

  P. Clinkamer, Aug. 3d, 1864.

  J. Crabtree, Nov. 8th, 1864.

  W. A. Endicott, April 2d, 1865.

  Chas. H. Gould, June 18th, 1864.

  M. D. Gillett, July 20th, 1864.

  H. A Gault, April 2d, 1865.

  Wm. Hassilky, June 18th, 1864.

  Thos. Long, July 6th, 1864.

  Ernst Luchterland, July 9th, 1864.

  Dudley McCloud, June 18th, 1864.

  Foster R. Soper, Aug., 1864.

  Chas. Schrœder, July 6th, 1864.

  Fred. Slonager, July 24th, 1864.

  Reichart Trigel, April 2d, 1865.

  J. R. Willoughby, Sept. 12th, 1864.

  A. Wood, July 30th, 1864.

  C. M. Peck, June 18th, 1864.

  D. L. Cole, June 17th, 1864.

  Wm. Bosack, April, 17th, 1864.

  Fred. Mallo, April 2d, 1865.


COMPANY "I."

  Corp. John Stockhardt, July 30th, 1864.

_Privates._

  Gilbert Applebee, June 18th, 1864.

  Charles P. Brown, Nov. 28th, 1864; disease.

  Aaron G. Bates, July 30th, 1864.

  Matthew Callahan, July 30th, 1864.

  Wm. A. Caldwell, July 30th, 1864.

  Wm. H. Cook, Sept. 27th, 1864; in hospital.

  Jacob Fifield, July 30th, 1864.

  Austin Goodknow, July 30th, 1864.

  Nath. Kimball, June 17th, 1864.

  Wm. A. Lease, June 18th, 1864.

  J. H. Myres, Oct. 8th, 1864; in hospital.

  Henry Pulk, June 18th, 1864.

  Henry Rappold, July 30th, 1864.

  Henry Schous, Sept. 26th, 1863.

  Seth Wilcox, Sept. 30th, 1864.

  John Stockhart, died in rebel prison at Danville, Va.


COMPANY "K."

  Capt. A. A. Burnett, Aug. 18th, 1864; wounds received July 30th,
  1864.

  1st Lieut. Meredith M. Whitt, April 2d, 1865.

  Serg't John Gallaino, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  Corp. Semour Hah-pah-ton-won-i-quette, July 30th, 1864.

_Privates._

  Chester Bishop, Aug. 21st, 1864.

  Lewis P. Hammond, March 21st, 1865; taken prisoner, July 30th,
  and died in Washington, shortly after his exchange.

  Frank H. Ingalls, July 30th, 1864.

  Kenosha Nesbell, July 30th, 1864.

  Patrick McGowan, March 20th, 1865; prisoner of war, July 30th.

  Amable Nah-she-kah-appah, July 30th, 1864.

  Joseph Nah-wah-quah, July 30th, 1864.

  Gunder Nelson, March 20th, 1865; prisoner of war, July 30th, 1864.

  Peter Pah-po-not-nien, March 20th, 1865; prisoner of war, July
  30th, 1864.

  John B. Pah-po-quah, March 20th, 1865; prisoner of war, July
  30th, 1864.

  August Piah-wah-sha, March 20th, 1865; prisoner of war, July
  30th, 1864.

  Joseph Pah-po-quin, Aug. 19th, 1864.

  Benj. Rubber, July 30th, 1864.

  Meshell Shah-boi-shak-kah, July 30th, 1864.

  Dominique Teco, July 30th, 1864.

  Felix Wah-to-nut, July 30th, 1864.

  Paul Weier-is-kasit, July 30th, 1864.

  Joseph Wah-sha-we-quon, July 30th, 1864.




ROSTER OF THE 37TH WIS. VOLS. AT ITS FINAL MUSTER OUT.


  COLONEL.
  JOHN GREEN.

  LIEUT. COLONEL.
  R. C. EDEN.

  MAJOR.
  ALVAH NASH.

  ADJUTANT.
  C. I. MILTIMORE.

  QUARTERMASTER.
  N. D. PRENTISS.

  SURGEON.
  D. C. ROUNDY.

  1ST ASSISTANT.
  J. H. ORRICK.

  2D ASSISTANT.
  Vacant.


LINE OFFICERS.

_Captain._

  A--D. A. LOWBER.
  B--L. D. HARMON.
  C--H. W. BELDEN.
  D--F. J. MUNGER.
  E--W. W. BUCK.
  F--E. BURNETT.
  G--GEO. GRAHAM.
  H--F. T. HOBBS.
  I--GEO. A. BECK.
  K--JAS. W. HITCHCOCK.

_1st. Lieutenant._

  GEO. HURST.
  J. WILLIAMSON.
  W. G. GREEN.
  J. RAMSBOTTOM.
  T. EARL.
  W. DODGE.
  E. L. DOOLITTLE.
  E. J. GRUMLEY.
  N. G. ROWLEY.
  A. J. HOLMES.

_2d. Lieutenant._

  GEO. TEAL.
  F. D. POWERS.
  D. A. SHERWOOD.
  J. A. SCOFIELD.
  JOHN SHADBOLT.
  J. W. WINCHESTER.
  A. A. BABCOCK.
  J. M. WELLS.
  GEO. L. CROSS.
  N. B. SMITH.


Non-Commissioned Staff.

  _Prin'l Musician_--W. H. BURTON.
  _Com. Serg't_--.... CHASE.
  _Q. M. Serg't_--SAM. PICKETT.
  _Serg't Major_--H. BABCOCK.
  _Hospital Steward_--PORTER ROUNDY.




L'Envoi.


      The play is done; the curtain drops,
        Slow falling to the prompter's bell,
      A moment yet the actor stops,
        And looks around to bid farewell.
      It is an irksome word and task,
        And when he's laughed and said his say,
      He shews, as he removes his mask,
        A face that's anything but gay.
                           [_Thackeray._

My task is almost done, and my pen runs over these few last lines
with a feeling closely akin to regret. Regret that this, the last
slight tie binding me, as one of their number, to those to whom
these pages are dedicated, is broken with their completion; regret
at my inability to do better justice to a subject which could well
task an abler pen than mine. The labor of its compilation has been
trifling and a labor of love. To the whole of my brother officers I
return my best thanks for the assistance they have rendered me, both
in furnishing me with the official statistics of their companies,
and also for their personal reminiscences of scenes we have passed
through together, as well as those from which I was absent.

In compiling this history I have, like Othello, simply tried to

      --"deliver a round unvarnished tale,"

and while I have tried to do justice to the subject, I have at
the same time endeavored not to be tedious; and here I think of
Canning's answer to the clergyman when the latter asked him, "How
did you like my sermon? I endeavored not to be tedious," and the
statesman tired out by "four heads and an application," wearily
responds, "and yet _you were_." At any rate the book goes forth,
"with all its imperfections on its head," and if it only serve to
while away a dull hour, on some future day, or to call up a kindly
memory of the "days of auld lang syne," I shall consider that it has,
fully, attained its purpose.

      And whether we shall meet again, I know not,
      Therefore our everlasting farewell take;
      For ever and for ever fare ye well.
      If we do meet again, why we shall _smile_;
      If not; why then this parting is wall made.
                                    [_Julius Cæsar._

And on this the anniversary day of our nation's birth, we sit here in
our quiet camp near Washington, overlooking the dome of the Capitol,
and the waters of that river by whose side repose the ashes of the
Father of his country. The noisy roar of the national salute has long
ceased to awaken the echoes of the surrounding hills, the calm quiet
of evening is settling down upon us, and as we look round and see the
bright stars and stripes of our ensign waving languidly, in the light
breeze, over the sleeping engines of war below, our thoughts travel
back down the dim, half unreal vista of the months left behind us.

A year ago and treason, with its accompaniments of bloodshed and
devastation, was rampant in the land. A year ago, and we lay on our
arms in front of the strongest army, garrisoning one of the strongest
fortified places of the whole Confederacy. To-day, that flag that now
floats from a hundred places within reach of our vision, floats once
more over every State in the Union. To-day the States are once more
united--let us hope for ever. To-day we sit here IN PEACE, looking
back on our past labors and enjoying their fruits.

      "When the war drum throbs no longer,
        And the battle flags are furled
      In the parliament of man,
        The federation of the world."
                                    [_Tennyson._

The Rebellion is at an end--the wicked attempt of a few unscrupulous
and ambitious politicians to overthrow the freest and best government
in the world, has come to naught; and, though a few faint sparks yet
smoulder on, the Torch of Secession is quenched. God grant forever.

TENALLYTOWN, D. C., July 4th, 1865.