THE MENTOR 1915.08.02, No. 88,
                              Butterflies




                            LEARN ONE THING
                               AT A TIME

                   AUGUST 2, 1915      SERIAL NO. 88

                                  THE
                                MENTOR

                              BUTTERFLIES

                         By Dr. W. J. HOLLAND
                     Director, Carnegie Institute

                  DEPARTMENT OF             VOLUME 3
                  NATURAL HISTORY          NUMBER 12

                         FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY




The Butterfly of Dreams


“You must not look upon butterflies as trivial,” said Laleham. “The
study of much smaller things has made modern science; and a butterfly
may well lead you to the ends of the earth--and even lose you among the
stars. You never know where it may take you. There is no hunting more
full of exciting possibilities. If you dare follow a butterfly, you
dare go anywhere; and no quarry will lead you into stranger places, or
into such unexpected adventures.”

He had never forgotten the day when that spell of exquisite silence and
dappled sunshine--the whole woodland with its finger on its lip--had
suddenly become embodied in a tiny shape of colored velvet wings that
came floating zig-zag up the dingle, swift as light, aery as a perfume,
soft and silent as the figured carpet in some Eastern palace. With
what awe he watched it, as at length it settled near him on a sunlit
weed; with what a luxury of observation his eyes noted its sumptuous,
unearthly markings, and what an image of wonder and exquisite mystery
it there and forever left on his mind. In a moment it was up and away
upon its uncharted travel through the wood. Instinctively he ran in
pursuit. But it was too late. He had lost his first butterfly.

For him, from that moment, all the beauty of the world, and the mystery
and the elusiveness of it, were symbolized in a butterfly. From that
moment it seemed to him that the success of life was--the catching of a
certain butterfly.

                                                  RICHARD LE GALLIENNE.




[Illustration]

  _MENTOR GRAVURES_

  SPRING BUTTERFLIES

  AMERICAN FRITILLARIES

  ADMIRALS

  A GROUP OF SWALLOWTAILS

[Illustration]

  _MENTOR GRAVURES_

  A GROUP OF VERY COMMON BUTTERFLIES

  A SWALLOWTAIL AND GROUP OF SKIPPERS

BUTTERFLIES

By DR. W. J. HOLLAND

[Illustration: Copyright The Century Co.

NORTH AMERICAN BUTTERFLIES

Above left--Gray Hairstreak. Above right--American Copper. Center--The
Banded Purple]

THE MENTOR · DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL HISTORY

AUGUST 2, 1915

Entered at the postoffice of New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.
Copyright, 1915, by the Mentor Association, Inc.


The earliest memories of my childhood cluster about a little manse in
the countryside. In winter, when the drifts were deep and the house was
snowbound, a usual recreation was to look at the cabinets containing
shells collected in Jamaica by my father during his residence as a
missionary on that island. I preferred, however, to feast my eyes on
the contents of certain flat boxes of Jamaica cedar, in which many of
the gorgeous moths and butterflies, as well as other insects, of that
sunny island were displayed.

[Illustration: Fig. 1

MAGNIFIED SCALES OF BUTTERFLIES

1, 2, ordinary scales. 3-5, androconia, or scales from wings of male
butterflies]

When spring and summer came I was very busy gathering plants, pressing
them for my little herbarium, and collecting shells which I found in
the woodlands and when wading the streams. Among insects the beetles
and butterflies pleased me most. Later my home was in North Carolina,
whither the family removed from central Ohio when I was a child of
ten. Here the same process went on, with the added pleasure of being
near a library, in which, among other books, was a copy of Wilson
and Bonaparte’s “American Ornithology,” many of the plates in which
I copied, and Say’s work on “American Entomology.” The collection of
plants and insects grew apace, and I was allowed to begin to stuff and
mount birds.

[Illustration: Fig. 2

WING SCALES

Greatly magnified scales of Cabbage butterfly]

In 1863 I came north, and for ten years my life was passed in college
and professional schools, where I had little time to study ornithology
and entomology. But the love of living things survived, and when, at
last settled in active professional life, I began to feel the need of
some pursuit which would furnish a physical as well as intellectual
recreation, I reverted to the study of insects. This took me into the
woods and fields.

Having begun to collect insects, I made up my mind that I must learn
to know all about them. I sought for books on the subject. There were
none of any value in the libraries about me. I then began to buy books,
and have continued, until today I possess a collection of works upon
entomology which is said to be the largest in private hands in America.
I began to seek information from other students of the subject. The
circle of my correspondence has grown until it covers many lands.
One of my correspondents, the late W. H. Edwards of Coalburg, West
Virginia, wrote to me that he wished to publish the third volume of his
magnificent work, “The Butterflies of North America,” and therefore
contemplated offering his collection to the British Museum in order to
obtain the necessary funds. I replied to him that I would undertake
to defray the expense of bringing out the third volume of his work,
provided he would turn over the collection to me, so that it might
be incorporated with my own. He accepted my offer, and I thus saved
for America its most important collection of butterflies. I bought
many other collections from time to time. I traveled widely, always
collecting, and I employed men to collect for me in foreign lands.
Today my collection is one of the largest in existence, containing tens
of thousands of species and hundreds of thousands of specimens.

[Illustration: Fig. 3

EGG OF THE VICEROY

_Basilarchia disippus_

Magnified 30 diameters]

[Illustration: Fig. 4

EGG OF THE MONARCH

_Anosia plexippus_

Magnified 30 diameters]

[Illustration: Fig. 5

THE MONARCH FROM LARVÆ TO CHRYSALIS

a, before shedding skin. b, in act of shedding skin. c, trying to catch
hold of silk button]


THE BUTTERFLY BOOK

To learn what I have involved a large outlay of money and much
patient study. When, therefore, it was suggested to me to prepare a
comprehensive book on the butterflies of the United States and Canada
I resolved to undertake the task; if for no other reason, to spare the
rising generation of young Americans from the expense and trouble to
which I had been subjected in trying to master the subject. I resolved
to illustrate the book profusely, using so far as possible the types
or identical specimens on which Edwards and others had founded their
descriptions. The result was “The Butterfly Book,” and I am now
following that up with a small manual entitled “The Butterfly Guide.”
Both of these works are illustrated with colored figures. With these
books the boys and girls of America are no longer compelled to wade,
as I did, through piles of books and pamphlets in order to get the
information they desire.


THE VALUE OF THE STUDY OF BUTTERFLIES

I feel that a brief recital of the way in which I came to be a student
of this delightful subject may interest others, and the story may
encourage some of the bright boys of America to take up the study of
entomology earnestly. It is no mean subject. There was a time when
“bugologists,” as students of insect life were facetiously called, were
classified as a variety of harmless cranks; but that day has passed.
The discovery that some knowledge of entomology is necessary to success
in agriculture, and that many diseases are due to infection brought
about by insects, has led the public to recognize the value of these
pursuits from a social and economic standpoint. But enough of this! Now
for the butterflies!

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

MONARCH BUTTERFLY]

[Illustration: Fig. 6

CHRYSALIS OF THE MONARCH]

[Illustration: Fig. 7

CHRYSALIS OF THE PIPEVINE SWALLOWTAIL

_Papilio philenor_]

Butterflies form one of the two suborders of the order Lepidoptera,
or “scaly-winged insects.” There are many orders of insects. Lord
Walsingham some years ago in an address stated that there were not
less than three million species of insects in this little world of
ours. Tens of thousands of species of Lepidoptera have already been
named and classified. Of butterflies there are twenty thousand species
and varieties known, and of moths there are about five times as many.
In the United States we have about six hundred and fifty species
of butterflies, and six thousand species of moths. New species are
still being turned up. Adam did not give names to all living things.
He left his job unfinished, and “the sons of Adam” since his day
have been carrying on the good work, and most vigorously during the
last hundred years. The work of naming and describing species new to
science is going on valorously at the present time. The last volume
of “The Zoölogical Record,” which has just been issued, shows that in
1913 nearly three thousand strictly scientific books and papers about
insects were published, not to speak of the innumerable publications
of a popular character upon the same subject which were printed during
that year. The same volume shows that no less than two hundred and
twenty-five new species of butterflies alone were described during
the year, besides a host of so-called varieties. The new species were
principally from Africa, Asia, and South America.

As I have said, butterflies are “scaly-winged insects.” Anyone who has
ever taken a moth or butterfly into his fingers has observed that the
creature in its struggles leaves behind a dustlike substance. Examined
under a microscope, this is seen to be composed of minute scales.
Magnified forms of some of these scales are represented in Figure 1;
while in Figure 2 there is shown a little patch of the scales on the
wing of the common Cabbage butterfly, they being arranged somewhat as
the shingles upon the roof of a house, or the scales upon the sides of
a fish.

[Illustration: Fig. 8

CATERPILLAR OF THE MONARCH

_Anosia plexippus_]

[Illustration: Fig. 9

HIBERNACULUM

The little case made by weaving the sides of a leaf together and tying
it to a twig by strands of silk. In this the baby larvæ of the Viceroy
passes the winter]

[Illustration: Fig. 10

CATERPILLAR OF THE VICEROY

Fully matured]


ORGANIZATION OF BUTTERFLIES

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

TIGER SWALLOWTAIL]

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

LARQUIN’S ADMIRAL]

Butterflies possess a remarkably perfect organization, which includes
the possession of senses and a considerable measure of intelligence,
when we consider the relative lowliness of their station in the
scale of being. Butterflies can see. They have, as all insects have,
compound eyes, made up of a number of facets, so that they can look
upward, downward, forward, and backward all at the same time. Their
antennæ (or feelers, as they are sometimes erroneously called) are most
probably organs for smelling. Their organs for hearing, if they have
any, are located upon their legs, as they are in the grasshoppers and
other insects. But butterflies do not appear to be talkative, as the
grasshoppers and crickets are; though some species can make curious
clicking sounds, as some moths can make squeaking sounds. That they can
taste is more than likely. Connected with the proboscis of butterflies,
through which they suck the honey of flowers, there are, no doubt,
gustatory nerves. Their brains, if the nerve-knot in the head can be so
called, are not very large; but their instincts in some respects are
marvelous. What, for instance, could be more wonderful than the manner
in which the female butterfly, without having received a botanical
education, infallibly selects the right plant upon which to lay her
eggs, so that her progeny, which she never lives to see, may obtain
proper nourishment? Nobody ever saw a female Swallowtail lay her eggs
upon pine or clover; nobody ever saw a Cabbage butterfly lay her eggs
upon other than a cruciferous plant,--either a cabbage, or one of its
cousins, as plant relationships go.


WONDERS OF TRANSFORMATION

One of the most wonderful things in the world of life is the manner
in which insects and butterflies, and moths in particular, undergo
transformation, passing from the egg into the caterpillar, then
changing into the chrysalis, and finally emerging as the winged insect,
fluttering among the flowers.
The eggs of butterflies are beautiful objects when examined under
a microscope. Some are shaped like spheres, some like cones, some
like spindles, others like turbans. They are fluted, ribbed, pitted,
sculptured, in a multitude of ways. In color they are as various as
the eggs of birds. Figure 3 shows the egg of the Viceroy (_Basilarchia
disippus_), one of the Admirals belonging to the same group of insects
as those which are figured on one of the plates of “The Butterfly
Book,” reproduced with this article. Figure 4 shows the egg of the
Monarch, or common “Milkweed butterfly” (_Anosia plexippus_), which the
Viceroy mimics in the color and markings of its wings.

[Illustration: Fig. 11

WING OF THE VICEROY

The scales removed to show the arrangement of wings]

[Illustration: Fig. 12

FRAME OF A FOLDING BUTTERFLY NET]

[Illustration: Fig. 13

RING FOR A BUTTERFLY NET

Made by soldering a hoop of stout brass wire into the top of the
ferrule of a fishing rod]

[Illustration: Fig. 14

JAR FOR KILLING BUTTERFLIES

A sheet of perforated paper pasted over lumps of cyanide of potash held
in place at the bottom by dry sawdust]

When the caterpillar within the egg has reached its full development
the top of the egg splits off, as if a lid had been lifted, and the
little creature crawls out, and generally makes its first meal upon
the shell which it has just vacated, thus whetting its appetite for
future banquets, treating the shell as a _hors d’œuvre_. The larvæ
of most butterflies and moths feed on vegetable food; but there are
some curious species, even of butterflies, which are carnivorous, the
caterpillars of which devour mealy bugs and the larvæ of ants. The
ant-eating species are found in Africa, Asia, and Australia.


THE PRODUCTION OF SILK

Caterpillars have the remarkable power of producing silk. Silk is a
viscous fluid secreted by long glands, which are near the back of the
caterpillar, and communicate with a little, tubelike organ near the
jaws, called the spinneret, through which the silk is voided, instantly
becoming, on contact with the air, a tough elastic fiber. Out of the
silk thus secreted the caterpillars of butterflies spin threads, which
they lay along the leaves and branches to guide themselves from place
to place. From the silk many species weave little shelters, or tents,
in which they are protected through the cold of winter. From the same
delicate material they fashion the little knobs, buttons, and girdles
by which the chrysalids are supported. The larvæ of butterflies do not
spin cocoons: this is done only by the caterpillars of moths.

[Illustration: Fig. 15

A BUTTERFLY SET AND MOUNTED FOR DRYING]

Caterpillars, as they develop, shed their skins a number of times.
When the little caterpillar has “grown too big for its breeches” it
anchors itself by a few threads to a fixed spot, the skin splits along
the back, and, being securely tied in place, remains fast, while the
caterpillar crawls out of it. The larvæ begins then to feed and grow
again, but often treats the shed skin as it treated the shell of the
egg, using it as a sort of “first course” before resuming the more
substantial vegetable diet.

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

THE BUCKEYE]

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

ORANGE-SKIRTED CALICO]

[Illustration: Copyright by the Century Co.

GREAT SPANGLED FRITILLARY]

After the caterpillar has molted four or five times it is transformed
into a chrysalis, reverting to a stationary condition, fixed as
immovably as it was fixed when it was only an egg. The process
of transformation is wonderful, and well repays attention. Among
butterflies there are three kinds of chrysalids,--those which are
pendant from a knob of silk, those which are supported by girdles
as well as by a silken knob, and those which are free and lie loose
between leaves and rubbish, stitched together with a few strands of
silk. The chrysalids of the “brush-footed butterflies” (_Nymphalidæ_)
are always pendant; those of the other families are cinctured, or
provided with girdles, except the “skippers” (_Hesperiidæ_), the
chrysalids of which are free, and often are found on the ground, like
the chrysalids of moths.

Figure 5 shows a caterpillar of the Monarch or Milkweed butterfly
undergoing the change into a chrysalis. There comes a critical moment
when the creature has wriggled itself nearly out of its skin, and when
the only thing to keep it hanging in its place is a fold of this skin
caught, as shown at _c_, between two segments or rings of the abdomen.
Thus suspended, it feels about with the cremaster, as the spine at the
end of its tail is called, which is full of minute curved hooklets at
its end. As soon as the creature feels these hooklets securely gripping
into the silk of the button above, it straightens out, and lets go its
hold upon the old skin and assumes the form given in Figure 6, which
gives the outline of the perfect chrysalis of this species,--a truly
beautiful object, pale, pearly green in color, adorned with spots of
burnished gold. Figure 7 shows the cinctured chrysalis of the Pipevine
Swallowtail. After sufficient time has elapsed to permit of certain
developments which take place in the chrysalis, the butterfly emerges.
The thing, which has slept as if in a coffin, comes forth on airy wings
to disport itself among the flowers. Little wonder that poets have seen
in this transformation an emblem of the Resurrection!

Some of the butterflies of the United States belong to genera which
are not confined to this country, but which occur also in the Eastern
Hemisphere. Indeed, some few species are identically the same as are
found in Europe and Asia. The Red Admiral (_Vanessa atalanta_) and
the Mourning Cloak (_Vanessa antiopa_) are as familiar to English
and German schoolboys as they are to boys in America. The Painted
Lady (_Pyrameis cardui_), known also as the Thistle butterfly, is a
cosmopolitan, and occurs all over the world, except perhaps in the hot
jungles of the Kongo and the Amazons. The Mourning Cloak hibernates
as a butterfly. In February, 1915, one of the guards in the Carnegie
Museum found a specimen of this butterfly which had flown into the
building. The day had been mild, and it had ventured forth from its
hiding place under the eaves, or in a hollow tree. These butterflies
may be found early in spring, as soon as the sap begins to flow,
congregating in the sugar camps and sipping the drip of the maple
trees. Comparatively few butterflies pass the winter in the winged
form, but undergo its rigors as chrysalids or as larvæ.

[Illustration: Fig. 16

VIVARIUM

A breeding cage in which caterpillars may be reared until the
butterflies are produced]


MIGRATION OF BUTTERFLIES

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

CLOUDED SULPHUR]

Most of the butterflies of the United States show a relationship to
those of the lands south of us. As the ice at the end of the Glacial
Period retreated there was an invasion of forms from the south. The
Monarch, one of our very commonest species, makes an annual migration
into the northern parts of the continent, coming up from the south,
as the milkweeds begin to sprout and put forth leaves, and then in
autumn retreats again to “lands of sun.” The species goes far north
into Canada, and in the fall of the year huge swarms of the retiring
insects may be seen clustering upon trees on the northern shores of the
Great Lakes, and also about Cape May in New Jersey. Many, no doubt, are
drowned in the lakes and in the ocean as they try to make their way
farther south.

[Illustration: Copyright by the Century Co.

COMMON WOOD-NYMPH]

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

EYED EMPEROR]

Among the most conspicuous and beautiful butterflies of the United
States are the Swallowtails, which belong to the genus _Papilio_. We
have many species. There are only three found in all Europe. One of
these (_Papilio machaon_), now nearly extinct in England, surviving
only in the fens of Cambridge and Norfolk, has many first cousins in
North America, one of which (_Papilio zelicaon_) is represented on the
plate entitled “A Group of Swallowtails.” The metropolis of the Machaon
group of Swallowtails is North America, and species belonging to it are
found from Newfoundland to Central America. I have a strong suspicion
that the butterflies of this group originated in the New World, as did
the horse, the camel, and many other animals, and that at a time when
North America and Asia were connected with each other in the region of
Bering Sea, as we know they were, this insect “went west” and finally
established a colony in England, which was at about that time also
hitched fast to the continent of Europe.


GREAT SEX DIFFERENCES

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

THISTLE BUTTERFLY]

Another group of butterflies which are nobly represented in North
America are the Fritillaries, belonging to the genera _Argynnis_ and
_Brenthis_. A group of these insects is shown in one of the plates.
The reader will observe how great a difference there is between the
males and the females, especially of _Argynnis Diana_. When the sexes
thus differ they are said to be “sexually dimorphic.” There are other
kinds of dimorphism. When butterflies have several broods it has been
observed that those of the spring brood differ in form and markings
from those of the summer brood, and again from those which come forth
in the fall of the year. Such species are said to be “seasonally
dimorphic.” In the tropics we recognize what are known as “dry season
forms” and “rainy season forms,” which are often very unlike each
other. Sexual dimorphism is not so pronounced in all species of the
genus _Argynnis_ as it is in _A. Diana_. The Fritillaries have their
metropolis in North America, but are also well represented in Asia,
Europe, and to some degree in Africa and in South America. In the
latter continent the species occur among the cool Andean regions and in
the far south, in Patagonia. It is a curious fact that on the flanks
of Mounts Kenia and Kilimanjaro, in Africa, separated by thousands
of miles from their congeners, there are species of this group of
butterflies. How did they get there? The geologist maybe can answer.

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

THE COMMA]

America is rich in species belonging to the family of the _Hesperiidæ_
or “Skippers.” They are well named, as anyone who has watched them
skipping and gamboling among the flowers can testify. They seem to be
in some respects intermediate between the other butterflies and the
moths.

An adequate account of the breeding of butterflies and of the methods
of preserving them for study and display would require another
article. I will then, at this time, simply refer the curious to the
books already written about these things, and, if any of The Mentor
readers are tempted to find the secret of eternal youth, by becoming
entomologists, they will discover that every library of any size has in
it today copies of the books they need to guide them. That was not the
case forty years ago.

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

NETTLE TORTOISE SHELL]


THE UTILITY OF ENTOMOLOGY

The annual loss suffered by agricultural communities through ignorance
of entomological facts is very great. Every plant has its insect enemy,
or, more correctly, its insect lover, which feeds upon it, delights in
its luxuriance, but makes short work, it may be of leaves, it may be
of flowers, it may be of fruit. It has been estimated that every known
species of plant has five or six species of insects which habitually
feed upon it.

We all have heard of the Hessian fly, of the weevil, and of the
army-worm. The legislature of Massachusetts has in recent years been
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in the attempt to exterminate
the gipsy moth. The caterpillar of the Cabbage butterfly ruins every
year material enough to supply sauerkraut to half of the people. The
codling moth, the little pinkish caterpillar which worms its way
through apples, is estimated to destroy five millions of dollars’ worth
of apples every year within the limits of the United States.

A few facts like these serve to show that the study of entomology is
not a study which deserves to be placed in the category of useless
pursuits. Viewed merely from a utilitarian standpoint, this study is
one of the most important, far outranking, in its actual value to
communities, the study of many branches of zoölogical science which
some people affect to regard as of a higher order.

[Illustration: Copyright The Century Co.

SILVER-BORDERED FRITILLARY]


SUPPLEMENTARY READING

[Illustration: Copyright by The Century Co.

BRUER’S LEMONAIS

Reprinted, by special permission, from the Century Dictionary]

[Illustration: Copyright by W. J. Holland, 1898

THE PURPLISH COPPER

From “The Butterfly Book”]

[Illustration: Copyright by W. J. Holland, 1898

REAKIRT’S ORANGE-TIP

From “The Butterfly Book”]

[Illustration: Copyright by W. J. Holland, 1898

THE RED SATYR

From “The Butterfly Book”]

  THE BUTTERFLIES OF NEW ENGLAND

  _By Samuel Hubbard Scudder._

  3 vols., illustrated by numerous fine plates and maps, showing
  over 100 species, with countless anatomical details, etc.

  THE BUTTERFLIES OF NORTH AMERICA

  _By William Henry Edwards._

  Numerous exquisite plates, in which over 200 species are figured.

  THE BUTTERFLY BOOK

  _By W. J. Holland._

  48 colored plates, showing 525 species and varieties.

  THE BUTTERFLY GUIDE

  _By W. J. Holland._

  150 small plates, showing 255 commoner species in natural colors.
  (In press.)

  THE BUTTERFLIES OF THE EASTERN UNITED STATES

  _By G. H. French._

  HOW TO KNOW THE BUTTERFLIES

  _By John Henry and Anna Botsford Comstock._

  45 colored plates, showing about 125 species.

  GUIDE TO BUTTERFLIES

  _By Samuel Hubbard Scudder._

  22 uncolored plates, showing about 100 species.

  THE BUTTERFLIES OF THE WEST COAST

  _By W. G. Wright._

  32 colored plates, with figures of 487 species.




THE OPEN LETTER


There are no small things in Nature, whatever the text-books say. All
things in life are large and important if we will but have them so.
The terms “large” and “small” are simply relative. To the eye of the
insect world the delicate butterfly is a monster with widespread wings
that completely cover the sky. To us the butterfly is an aery trifle, a
gentle, silken-winged creature, a favorite subject of the poet’s fancy,
“fluttering gaily, frolicking daily”--its life all pleasure, its task
all play.



[Illustration: MILKWEED BUTTERFLY

_Anosia plexippus_, Linnæus. Body dark, border of wings black and
spotted, center orange in color]

And yet while so substantial and ponderous an animal as an ox can do
its heavy work under a name containing but two letters, these fragile,
fairy creatures must bear up under the burden of such titles as
_Argynnis Cybele_ or _Lycæna Pseudargiolus_. To the untutored mind it
seems unfair.



But Dr. Holland tells us that we must not be daunted by this, nor
let it check our interest in the study of butterflies. “The student
of this delightful branch of science,” he says, “is certain to be
called upon to use some rather long and uncouth words in the pursuit
of the subject. But experience will soon enable him to master any
little difficulties that arise from this source, and he will finally
come to recognize how useful these technical terms are in designating
distinctions which exist, but which are often wholly overlooked by the
uneducated and unobservant.” It is reassuring, then, to be told by Dr.
Holland that the collector at the outset need not tax his memory with
the long scientific names which he encounters in the books. The late
Dr. Horn, a most eminent entomologist, once said to Dr. Holland that
he made it a duty not to try to remember the scientific names. He was
content to have these names attached to the pins holding the specimens
in his cabinet, where he could easily refer to them.

“In writing about butterflies,” Dr. Holland says, “it is quite
customary to abbreviate the generic name by giving merely its initial.
Thus, in writing about the Milkweed Butterfly, _Anosia plexippus_, the
naturalist will designate it as _A. plexippus_.” Then he will attach
the name of the man who gave this specific name to the insect. As
Linnæus was the first to name this particular insect, the abbreviation
would be as follows: _A. plexippus_, Linn. This simplifies things to
some extent.



“In speaking about butterflies,” writes Dr. Holland, “it is quite
common to omit the generic name altogether and use only the specific
name. Thus, after returning from a collecting trip, I might say:
‘I was quite successful today. I took twenty _Aphrodites_, four
_Myrinas_, and two specimens of _Atlantis_.’ In this case there can
be no misunderstanding of the meaning.” The specific names alone are
sufficient, and they are easy enough for any enthusiastic collector to
learn.

[Illustration: W. D. Moffat

EDITOR]




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

SPRING BUTTERFLIES

1. _Pyrameis Cordui_, Linn. (The Painted Lady), ♂ (male)

2. _P. Huntera_, Fabr. (Hunter’s Butterfly), ♂ (male)

3. _Grapta Interrogationis_, Fabr. (The Question Sign), ♂ (male)

4. _Colias Philodice_, Godt., ♂ (male)

5. _Colias Philodice_ (The Clouded Sulphur), ♀ (female)

6. _Vanessa Antiopa_, Linn. (The Mourning Cloak), ♀ (female)]




BUTTERFLIES

THISTLE BUTTERFLIES, ANGLE WINGS, AND SULPHURS

Monograph Number Six in The Mentor Reading Course

        Winged flowers, or flying gems.--_Moore._


Painted Lady and Thistle Butterfly are prettier names than _Pyrameis
cardui_ for the familiar speckled, brown creature with a roseate tinge
shown at the top of the plate. Found wherever the thistle grows, it
is therefore one of the most widely distributed of all butterflies
(as the thistle is one of the most widely distributed of all plants),
fluttering over the purple blooms in the temperate regions of both
hemispheres and in many tropical lands as well. It is hard to
distinguish the Painted Lady from Hunter’s butterfly on the left. If,
however, we should look on the under side of the hind wings, we should
find that the Hunter’s butterfly has two large eyelike spots there, and
the Painted Lady numerous and smaller eyelike spots. The two specimens
are male.

Another common butterfly belongs to the Angle Wings, whose
characteristics are deeply cut fore wings, the under side mimicking the
bark of trees and dead leaves. The under side of the rover shown here
visiting a dandelion is mottled brown with a pale purple hue. A silvery
mark, like a semicolon or an interrogation, on the hind wings gives
_Grapta interrogationis_ its curious name. This is a common butterfly
in the United States. Happy flocks are frequently found at the pans and
buckets in a sugar camp, joyfully drinking the sap which drips from the
wounded maples.

The splendid female spreading her lustrous velvet wings and rocking
on a buttercup, on the lower right, is _Vanessa antiopa_, popularly
known as the Mourning Cloak and the Camberwell Beauty. Though common
in the north temperate zone, this splendid butterfly is none the
less beautiful because it is a familiar object. The blue spots and
the yellow border form a very decorative combination. The eggs of
this butterfly are laid on twigs of willows and elms, upon which the
caterpillars feed. The wings are noticeably graceful in line and
proportion. The Painted Lady, the Hunter’s butterfly, the Interrogation
butterfly, and the Mourning Cloak belong to the enormous family of the
_Nymphalidæ_, or brush-footed butterflies.

In an entirely different family are classed the Sulphurs, belonging
to the genus _Colias_. They are medium-seized butterflies, yellow
or orange in hue, with black borders upon their wings. Though there
are many varieties, ranging from the palest primrose to the deepest
orange, and varying also in size as well as color, yet, in the main,
the species is remarkably constant. The chief food of the Sulphurs is
clover, and consequently the lovely pink and white clover fields are
alive with these delicate little sprites. The Sulphurs also swarm in
moist places by the wayside, and rise from pools and ruts in the roads
at the approach of persons or vehicles. The butterflies in this family
have six walking feet. The family, the _Papilionidæ_, which includes
the Swallowtails and their allies, the Sulphurs and Whites, is very
large.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

AMERICAN FRITILLARIES

1. _Argynnis diana_, Cramer, ♂ (male)

2. _Argynnis diana_, Cramer, ♀ (female)

3. _Argynnis cybele_, Fabricius, ♂ (male)

4. _Argynnis cybele_, Fabricius, ♀ (female)

5. _Argynnis leto_, Behr, ♂ (male)

6. _Argynnis leto_, Behr, ♀ (female)]




BUTTERFLIES

SILVER SPOTS

Monograph Number Two in The Mentor Reading Course

        Lo, the bright train their radiant wings unfold!
        With silver fringed, and freckled o’er with gold:
        On the gay bosom of some fragrant flower
        They, idly fluttering, live their little hour.--_Mrs. Barbauld._


The Fritillaries (taking their name from their resemblance to the
spotted flowers of the lily, called fritillary), or Silver Spots,
belong to the _Nymphalidæ_, one of the largest families of butterflies.
The scientific name of the genus is _Argynnis_.

These Fritillaries, or Silver Spots, are of medium or large size,
generally with the upper surface of the wings reddish or tawny yellow,
marked with well-defined black stripes and spots like arrowheads near
the outer borders. On the under side of the fore wings the design is
faintly repeated; while on the under side of the hind wings large
silvery spots are so numerous and characteristic that they give this
tribe its popular name. The eyes are bare, the antennæ moderately long,
ending in a well-defined, flattened club.

These beautiful butterflies are found all over the world; but they have
reached their greatest development in North America. One cannot travel
anywhere in the summer and early autumn without seeing some form of the
genus.

The sexes seem to have equally divided their fine points; for the male
is brighter in hue on the upper surface, while the female has the
broader black markings on her paler ground color. This will be evident
by looking at the plate, where the male and female of three varieties
of Fritillaries appear. The two in the center are classified as
_Argynnis Diana_. These splendid creatures, the finest of their race,
are found at their best in Virginia, the Carolinas, northern Georgia,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Ohio, Indiana, Missouri, and Arkansas. The male
is a deep, rich brown, with a dull, orange border, ornamented with
two rows of brown spots, larger on the fore than on the hind wings.
The under side of the wings is pale buff, deeply marked with black
on the fore wings; while the hind wings are decorated with silvery
crescents on a rich, velvety, bluish black. The fore wings of the
female are ornamented with three rows of bright blue spots (the outer
row sometimes is pale blue or white). Blue spots edge the hind wings,
the inner row somewhat squared, and each has a central spot of black.
Blue and black spots mark the under side of her fore wings, and silvery
crescents and spots the under side of her hind wings.

The Great Spangled Fritillary appears on the plate. Its scientific name
is _Argynnis cybele_. It ranges over the Atlantic States and the valley
of the Mississippi as far as Nebraska. A small variety is found in New
Mexico. The upper surface is tawny red, with heavy and handsome stripes
and spots of black. The under side is heavily silvered. The female
is paler than the male and appears to wear a kind of bolero jacket
of dark, chocolate brown. Her markings are heavier than those of her
lord and master. On the under side she wears exactly the same silvery
decorations that he sports.

_Argynnis Leto_ is represented at the bottom of the plate, and greatly
resembles the former variety. Its ground color is paler; but the female
is more heavily marked, but with less silver underneath.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

ADMIRALS

1. _Basilarchia astyanax_, Fabricius, ♂ (male)

2. _Adelpha californica_, Butler, ♀ (female)

3. _Basilarchia lorquini_, Boisduval, ♂ (male)

4. _Basilarchia arthemis_, Drury, ♂ (male)

5. _Basilarchia arthemis_, Drury, var. _proserpina_, Edwards, ♂ (male)

6. _Basilarchia weidemeyeri_, Edwards, ♂ (male)]




BUTTERFLIES

WHITE ADMIRALS

Monograph Number Three in The Mentor Reading Course

        Some to the sun their insect wings unfold,
        Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;
        Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
        Their fluid bodies half dissolved in light.--_Pope._


The largest family of butterflies is called _Nymphalidæ_,--a pretty
name; for are not these “winged flowers” nymphs and sylphs of the woods
and fields?

This family is also called “Brush-footed,” because the fore legs are
without tarsi, or feet, in both sexes; the first pair of legs being
dwarfed, the feet looking like a brush of hairs, and so utterly useless
for walking that they are carried _folded up against the breast_.
This enormous family is divided into many subfamilies. It embraces
both large and small species. The family is ancient, and most fossil
butterflies so far discovered belong to it.

A widely distributed genus of this family comprises the White Admirals
(_Basilarchia_). These are among our most interesting butterflies.
Their heads are large, their antennæ moderately long, ending in a short
club, their fore wings subtriangular with the tip well rounded, and the
hind wings rounded and scalloped. The plate exhibits several varieties.
In the lower right is _Basilarchia astyanax_, or the Red-spotted
Purple, which ranges from southern Canada through the United States
as far as the Rocky Mountains and even to Mexico. This butterfly is
somewhat variable, not always keeping closely to its type.

Flying downward in the upper right and center are two forms of
_Basilarchia arthemis_. The central butterfly is distinguished by
broad white bands crossing both the fore wings and the hind wings. It
is further ornamented on the hind wings by a row of red spots shading
into blue and crescents following the indentations. In the form above,
known as _proserpina_, the white bands are less marked. The main
characteristic of the forms is the persistence of the red spots on the
upper side of the hind wings. These butterflies abound in New England,
New York, Quebec, Ontario, and parts of Pennsylvania. A close family
resemblance is traced in the _Basilarchia Weidenmeyeri_ in the upper
left-hand corner. It differs by having a series of white spots on the
borders of the wings.

Lorquin’s Admiral (_Basilarchia Lorquini_) is easily distinguished
from all other species by the short yellowish bar near the middle of
the fore wings and the bright red hue of the tips of these wings. A
California species appears in the lower left-hand corner, handsomely
banded and strikingly marked with orange-red spots near the ends of the
fore wings.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

A GROUP OF SWALLOWTAILS

1. _Papilio zolicaon_, Boisduval, ♂ (male)

2. _Papilio daunus_, Boisduval, ♂ (male)

3. _Papilio pilumnus_, Boisduval, ♂ (male)

(The figures in this plate are reduced, being only two-thirds of the
natural size)]




BUTTERFLIES

THE SWALLOWTAILS

Monograph Number Four in The Mentor Reading Course

        The butterfly the ancient Grecians made
        The soul’s fair emblem and its only name.--_Coleridge._


Three Swallowtails appear among the apple blossoms on this plate. This
group of the _Papilionidæ_ is characterized by having a long tail
at the end of each hind wing. Swallowtails are usually large, with
great diversity of form in the wings. Some species mimic the Milkweed
butterflies and the Heliconians, in such cases having no tails. A small
matter like that does not disturb the entomologist, who has other ways
of testing than diversities of color and form. He looks at the anatomy
of the insect, and no amount of mimicry can save the pretender from
being properly classified.

The Milkweed butterfly is particularly distasteful to birds, and
therefore enjoys freedom from attack by them. Other butterflies are
equally distasteful, and are therefore “protected,” as naturalists
say. As the result of a slow process of development, some of the
members of the Swallowtail tribe, as well as of other tribes, have come
to resemble these protected butterflies, and share with them their
immunity from attack. This mimicry is not conscious, nor in any sense
an evidence of superior intelligence or sagacity.

The magnificent Swallowtail on the right (_Papilio daunus_) keeps his
brilliant eyes wide open and depends upon his own rapid flight from
his swift and eager pursuer rather than impair features which are as
characteristic in his family as the Hapsburg lip or the Bourbon nose
in those dynasties. _Papilio daunus_ has two tails on each wing, going
one better than the pride of the family, the Tiger Swallowtail, which
has but one. He is doubtless very proud of the lobes of the interior
angles of his hind wings. This variety is found in the eastern valleys
of the Rocky Mountains, in Arizona, and in Mexico. Below is _Papilio
pulumnus_, a little smaller than the preceding, with heavier markings
and with the inner lobe of the wing so developed as to give him the
appearance of having three tails. This butterfly is a Mexican, but is
occasionally found in Arizona.

Flying downward is another variety, the _Papilio zelicaon_, whose broad
black borders are decorated with white spots. It has but one tail. Its
range is from Vancouver Island to Arizona and eastward to Colorado; but
it prefers the valleys and foothills to the Sierras. The Swallowtails
are wonderfully developed in the tropics. Many species are found in
America, but only one in England. Swallowtails are great favorites with
collectors. They have six walking feet in both sexes, and their flight
is swift and dashing.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

A GROUP OF VERY COMMON BUTTERFLIES

1. _Papilio turnus_, Linnæus, ♂ (male)

2. _Papilio turnus_, Linnæus, dimorphic, ♀ (female), _glaucus_, Linnæus

3. _Coltas eriphyle_, Edwards--_Colias hageni_, ♂ (male), Edwards,
_under side_

4. _Pyrameis atalanta_, Linnæus, ♂ (male)

5. _Epargyreus tityrus_, Fabricius, ♂ (male)]




BUTTERFLIES

RED ADMIRAL, SWALLOWTAIL, AND SKIPPER

Monograph Number One in The Mentor Reading Course

        These be the genii of the flowers,
        Daintily fed with honey and pure dew.--_Hood._


The two butterflies on the right are the male and female of the
Tiger Swallowtail, the finest of this tribe. _Papilio turnus_ is its
technical name, and it abounds in Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland,
North and South Carolina, Kentucky, and Tennessee. It is charming in
its bold and rapid motions, and is a restless creature, always on
the wing. Its dark bands are arranged after the fashion of a tiger’s
stripes, whence its name. The Tiger Swallowtail has a tendency to
produce dark forms; and the dark form of the female was long regarded
as a distinct species until it was discovered that some eggs produced
by yellow females produced black females, and conversely some eggs
produced by black females produced yellow females.

The brilliant butterfly poised on the blades of grass on the left is
the well known Red Admiral, familiar throughout North America, Europe,
Asia, and Africa. It belongs to the “Brush-footed” race. Below it
a little Sulphur shows the inside of its wings. This, the _Colias
eriphyle_, extends from the Atlantic to the Pacific and from Canada to
Florida and Texas.

The little brown Silver-spotted Skipper standing on the open flower,
with a broad, irregular silvery spot on the under side of the hind
wings, also has a wide range. It is found from Canada to the Isthmus of
Panama. The Silver-spotted Skipper belongs to the _Hesperiidæ_, which
are generally small in size, with stout bodies. They have six walking
feet in both sexes, and spurs on the hind feet. The antennæ of many of
these butterflies end in a fine point and are usually bent into a hook.
They are noted for their quick, strong flight. When at rest most of
the skippers hold their wings erect, though some of them extend them
horizontally.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration:

  The Butterfly Book      _Courtesy Doubleday, Page & Co._

Copyrighted by W. J. Holland, 1898

A SWALLOWTAIL AND GROUP OF SKIPPERS

1. _Papilio rutulus_, Boisduval

2. _Pholisora alpheus_, Edwards

3. _Calpodes ethlius_, Cramer

4. _Pholisora catullus_, Fabricius

5. _Thanaos afranius_, Lintner

6. _Eudamus proteus_, Linnæus

7. _Thanaos brizo_, Boisd.-Lec.

8. _Thanaos clitus_, Edwards

9. _Pyrrhopyge araxes_, Hewitson

10. _Achalarus lycidas_, Smith and Abbot, _under side_

11. _Plestia dorus_, Edwards

12. _Achalarus cellus_, Boisd.-Lec.]




BUTTERFLIES

THE SKIPPERS

Monograph Number Five in The Mentor Reading Course

        Hast thou heard the butterflies,
        What they say betwixt their wings?--_Tennyson._


All the little brown butterflies fluttering in various positions on
this plate are Skippers, members of the family of the _Hesperiidæ_.
These are generally small and stout and have a quick, strong flight.
The most striking one here is the Long-tailed Skipper, flying downward
on the left. The upper side of his wings are brown, glossed with green
at the base. The fore wings are spotted. This butterfly lays its eggs
on the wistaria and butterfly pea. Though tropical, _Eudamus protens_
is occasionally found along the Atlantic seacoast as far north as New
York.

In the upper right-hand corner is a female Brazilian Skipper, a robust,
thick-bodied butterfly common in the Gulf States and North Carolina and
ranging southward through the Antilles to Argentina.

A little below is the Common Sooty Wing, black on both sides of the
wings with a series of little spots. It belongs to all of North
America. The New Mexican Sooty Wing is in full flight at the upper left
corner. It is common in Nevada, Arizona, and New Mexico.

The brown one, the Sleepy Dusky Wing flying downward in the center
and the large black one below the Common Sooty Wing belong to the
genus _Thanaos_, the Dusky Wings, a group which reaches its largest
development in North America. They are all dark; but a few varieties
have bright spots on their hind wings.

Few know the one in the center, _Plestea dorus_, as it is confined to
Arizona and Mexico. Its life history is unknown.

The brown one above the Long-tailed Skipper is called Afranius’s Dusky
Wing. It is common in Arizona. The one below the Common Sooty Wing is
_Thanaos Clitus_, having black hind wings with a broad fringe of white.
Its home is Arizona and New Mexico. Nothing is known of its early
stages.

The large butterfly in the lower left corner is _Pyrrhopyginæ craxes_,
a native of southern Texas, Mexico, and farther south. Its antennæ end
in curved, blunt clubs. When resting it spreads its wings horizontally.
Nothing is known of its life history.

Poised on the clover a female Hoary Edge shows the under side of her
wings. This belongs to the Middle and Southern States.

Flying toward the white bloom is a relative, a male Golden-banded
Skipper, common in Virginia, the Carolinas, and westward to Arizona and
Mexico.

Much more beautiful in form is the Swallowtail, _Papilio rutulus_, the
Pacific Coast representative of the Tiger Swallowtail of the Atlantic
States. Its ground color is a pale yellow, and it has tiger stripes
like its near cousin.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 3, No. 12, SERIAL No. 88
  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL


THE ADVISORY BOARD

  JOHN G. HIBBEN, _President of Princeton University_

  HAMILTON W. MABIE, _Author and Editor_

  JOHN C. VAN DYKE, _Professor of the History of Art, Rutgers
  College_

  ALBERT BUSHNELL HART, _Professor of Government, Harvard
  University_

  WILLIAM T. HORNADAY, _Director New York Zoölogical Park_

  DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF, _Lecturer and Traveler_

The purpose of The Mentor Association is to give its members, in an
interesting and attractive way, the information in various fields of
knowledge which everybody wants to have. The information is imparted
by interesting reading matter, prepared under the direction of leading
authorities, and by beautiful pictures, produced by the most highly
perfected modern processes.

THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

SUBSCRIPTION, THREE DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75 CENTS EXTRA.
CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES FIFTEEN CENTS. PRESIDENT
AND TREASURER, R. M. DONALDSON; VICE-PRESIDENT, JOHN H. HAWLEY;
SECRETARY, W. D. MOFFAT

COMPLETE YOUR MENTOR LIBRARY

Subscriptions always begin with the current issue. The following
numbers of The Mentor Course, already issued, will be sent postpaid at
the rate of fifteen cents each, or one dollar for eight copies.

  Serial
  No.

   1. Beautiful Children in Art
   2. Makers of American Poetry
   3. Washington, the Capital
   4. Beautiful Women in Art
   5. Romantic Ireland
   6. Masters of Music
   7. Natural Wonders of America
   8. Pictures We Love to Live With
   9. The Conquest of the Peaks
  10. Scotland, the Land of Song and Scenery
  11. Cherubs in Art
  12. Statues With a Story
  13. Story of America in Pictures: The Discoverers
  14. London
  15. The Story of Panama
  16. American Birds of Beauty
  17. Dutch Masterpieces
  18. Paris, the Incomparable
  19. Flowers of Decoration
  20. Makers of American Humor
  21. American Sea Painters
  22. Story of America in Pictures: The Explorers
  23. Sporting Vacations
  24. Switzerland: The Land of Scenic Splendors
  25. American Novelists
  26. American Landscape Painters
  27. Venice, the Island City
  28. The Wife in Art
  29. Great American Inventors
  30. Furniture and Its Makers
  31. Spain and Gibraltar
  32. Historic Spots of America
  33. Beautiful Buildings of the World
  34. Game Birds of America
  35. Story of America in Pictures: The Contest for North America
  36. Famous American Sculptors
  37. The Conquest of the Poles
  38. Napoleon
  39. The Mediterranean
  40. Angels in Art
  41. Famous Composers
  42. Egypt, the Land of Mystery
  43. Story of America in Pictures: The Revolution
  44. Famous English Poets
  45. Makers of American Art
  46. The Ruins of Rome
  47. Makers of Modern Opera
  48. Dürer and Holbein
  49. Vienna, the Queen City
  50. Ancient Athens
  51. The Barbizon Painters
  52. Abraham Lincoln
        Volume 2
  53. George Washington
  54. Mexico
  55. Famous American Women Painters
  56. The Conquest of the Air
  57. Court Painters of France
  58. Holland
  59. Our Feathered Friends
  60. Glacier National Park
  61. Michelangelo
  62. American Colonial Furniture
  63. American Wild Flowers
  64. Gothic Architecture
  65. The Story of the Rhine
  66. Shakespeare
  67. American Mural Painters
  68. Celebrated Animal Characters
  69. Japan
  70. The Story of the French Revolution
  71. Rugs and Rug Making
  72. Alaska
  73. Charles Dickens
  74. Grecian Masterpieces
  75. Fathers of the Constitution
  76. Masters of the Piano
        Volume 3
  77. American Historic Homes
  78. Beauty Spots of India
  79. Etchers and Etching
  80. Oliver Cromwell
  81. China
  82. Favorite Trees
  83. Yellowstone National Park
  84. Famous Women Writers of England
  85. Painters of Western Life
  86. China and Pottery of Our Forefathers
  87. The Story of The American Railroad

NUMBERS TO FOLLOW

Aug. 16. THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

_By Dean C. Worcester, Secretary of the Interior of the Philippine
Islands, 1901-1913._

Everyone is interested in the Philippines and their future. Mr.
Worcester has had a long experience there, and is the recognized
leading authority on the subject. The illustrations have been carefully
selected from a large collection in his possession.

Sept. 1. THE LOUVRE

_By Prof. John C. Van Dyke_

This is the beginning of a series of visits to the great art galleries
of the world. In each case the members of The Mentor Association will
be personally conducted by a writer of authority who is familiar with
the gallery described. Naturally this will mean a number of The Mentor
of great interest in text and of rare beauty in illustration.

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

52 EAST 19th STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y.




THE MENTOR


The Mentor Service

In addition to the interesting and instructive reading matter in the
pages of The Mentor; to the beautiful gravure pictures and the many
illustrations in each number; and to the graphic descriptive monographs
printed with each of these gravure illustrations--in addition to all
this valuable matter in text and in pictures,

THE MENTOR GIVES SERVICE

This service covers the needs of those who want to gain knowledge by an
easy and agreeable method.

  SUPPLEMENTARY READING COURSES. Each number of The Mentor prints a
  list of books for supplementary reading on the subject covered by
  The Mentor. But in addition to this The Mentor Service includes
  courses of reading for its members along the lines of subjects
  covered by The Mentor Course. These courses of reading are
  prepared under the direction of members of the Advisory Board of
  The Mentor--all of them prominent educators.

  READING CLUB PROGRAMS. The Mentor has prepared its material in
  the form of courses for reading clubs. The service is complete,
  including not only the interesting matter supplied in The Mentor,
  but direction as to club organization, and programs of Mentor
  meetings, with practical hints concerning picture material and
  how to use it. These Mentor courses are so arranged as to provide
  for any number of club meetings, from two or three up to twenty
  and more.

  BOOK SUPPLIES. In many cases members of the Association are not
  in a location convenient to sources of book supply. The Mentor
  Association will, therefore, secure books as requested and will
  supply them to its members at publishers’ prices.

  INQUIRY DEPARTMENT. The Mentor gives to its members a full and
  intelligent service in answering inquiries concerning books,
  reading, and all matters of general information having a bearing
  on The Mentor courses. Inquiries from readers are referred to
  members of our Advisory Board or others who are leaders in their
  particular fields of knowledge.

MANY READERS HAVE COME TO KNOW THE VALUE OF THE MENTOR SERVICE. IN THE
FULLEST SENSE IT SUPPLEMENTS AND ROUNDS OUT THE PLAN OF THE MENTOR. ALL
MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION ARE INVITED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS SERVICE

MAKE THE SPARE MOMENT COUNT